Rules
150 rules (50 in each subject) - memorize

Essay Issue Spotting		- very important
100 Essays, 33 per subject

MBE				
lot of practice

Essay - Approach
Torts
Negligence
(look out for Accident or carelessness)

Strict Liability
(hazard or animal)

1. DUTY?

NEGLIGENCE PER SE?
(Statute)

DUTY BASED ON PERIL?
(unreasonable risk to others)

DUTY BASED ON PREMISES LIABILITY?
(businesses)

ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE DOCTRINE?
(childen)

LIABILITY BASED ON RESCUER DOCTRINE / FIREMAN’S RULE?
(rescuer is saving some)

2. BREACH AND STANDARD OF CARE?

RES IPSA LOQUITUR?

BREACH BASED ON NEGLIGENT ENTRUSTMENT?

3. ACTUAL CAUSE of injury to Paula?

4. PROXIMATE CAUSE of injury to Paula?

5. DAMAGES?
(special or general damages)

NEGLIGENT INFLICTION OF EMOTIONAL DISTRESS?
(bystander)

VICARIOUS LIABILITY BASED ON RESPONDEAT SUPERIOR ?
(employer and employee)

VICARIOUS LIABILITY for JOINT ENTERPRISE ?
(2 people with equal rights causing torts)

VICARIOUS LIABILITY for acts of INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR?
(person is not responsible)

duties are delegable that you can give to contractor
non delegable , that you cannot give to contractors

6. CONTRIBUTORY or COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE?

EGG-SHELL PLAINTIFF?
person suffers previously from some injury

7. ASSUMPTION OF RISK?
	


Products Liability

Unreasonably dangerous product


Four Theories has to be explained
1. Breach of Express Warranty
(sellers expressly communicate you that product is good for you)
and you thought that he is saying truth
and you bought it
and you got injured

2. Breach of Implied Warranty
seller knows your intended use of that product
and he sold you based on your intended use
and you relied on seller,
and you got injured 

3. Negligence
duty to keep good products in market and if someone gets hurt due to your carelessness and it causes peril.

4. Strict Liability
seller should be commercial supplier, product is dangerous when it leave's the seller








What things study 

1. Rules
2. Issue Spotting  
3. Timings for MBE and Essay
4. Analyse each issue


1. Rules
2. Issue Spotting
3. Analysis

4. MBE (different topics)
negligence
products liability

Monday to Sunday
Torts
1. Negligence & Strict Liability
2. Products Liability
3. Defamation
4. Invasion to Privacy
5. Nuisance
6. Intentional Torts


Criminal
1. SAC
Template
Rule;;;;

Analyse
there was urging because A asked B to kill
2. Crime against person
3. Crime against Home, burglary and arson
4. Crime against property
5. Murder - im, vm
6. Defenses

Contract
1. Formation of Contract
2. Contract Terms
3. Defenses
4. Third Party Beneficiary
5. Breach
6. Remedies



i manslaughter
26.
For the defendant to be found guilty of manslaughter, a proximate cause between the illegal act and the resulting death of the victim must exist. This causation must be more than simple cause-in-fact; it must be somehow foreseeable from the illegal action taken. In this case, the fact the defendant did not possess a valid license was not a causal factor in the death of the child.


i manslaughter
28.  The businessman should be convicted of manslaughter because he recklessly caused the death of a human being, and he has no valid self-defense claim. The businessman is charged with manslaughter, which is the killing of another person without malice aforethought. He did recklessly kill another person by driving while intoxicated and speeding through a stop sign. The businessman's claim of self-defense will fail because his belief that he was acting in self-defense was not reasonable.

 a proper claim of self-defense does not require that the person actually be in danger, but rather that the person reasonably believe he is in danger, even if it is not true. Since the businessman's belief that he was acting in self-defense was unreasonable, and because he recklessly killed another human being, he should be convicted of manslaughter.


murder
29. 
Murder is causing the death of a human being with malice aforethought. The husband, with the intent to kill his wife, poisoned her, which was an immediate, actual, and proximate cause of her death. Although the wife's death was, unknown to the husband, unlikely, the husband's actions did cause her death, and he did so intentionally and with malice aforethought. The husband is guilty of murder.

mbe
30.
The employee, with premeditation and deliberation, caused the company vice president's death. Although his intent was to kill his boss, the doctrine of transferred intent will presume that intent to go with whomever started the vehicle.



murder
41. When determining the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain a charge, the appellate court considers the evidence in the light most favorable to the state. In this case, the marksman placed his target so that, if he missed, he would be shooting in the direction of the children; he fired numerous shots from a rifle in the direction of an occupied playground and killed a child. Even though he did not have the intent to kill, the evidence is sufficient for a jury to find that the marksman acted with extreme recklessness toward human life, which is sufficient for a finding of malice aforethought for the murder conviction. The appellate court should affirm the conviction of murder.












