Products Liability

Definition

Unreasonably Dangerous

Breach of Express Warranty

Breach of Implied Warranty

Negligence

Strict Product Liability 

Extras

Intentional Theory

Defect Types

Example Hypo

The Macho-X99 chainsaw is a light-duty chainsaw designed for trees no bigger than 18". In the owner's manual said in big red letters, "WARNING - NEVER TRY TO CUT DOWN A TREE BIGGER THAN 18" OR THIS SAW MIGHT CATCH FIRE." There are no warnings on the saw itself.

Tom went into Sam's Bargain Center. Sam told him, "This is the best chainsaw on the market. The Macho-X99 will cut trees up to 36" in diameter." Tom bought the Macho-X99 chainsaw.

Dick went into Sam's Bargain Center and said he didn't know much about chainsaws but needed on that could cut a tree about 24" in diameter. Sam told him, "I am an expert when it comes to chainsaws. I recommend this Macho-X99". Dick bought the Macho-X99 chainsaw.

Moe went into Sam's Bargain Center and bought the Macho-X99 chainsaw without any discussion.

Sam, Tom and Dick never read the owner's manual and were unware of the potential fire danger. When Tom and Dick tried to cut down trees bigger than 18" the saws burst into flames and burned them.

Moe saw the warning in the owner's manual and tried to return the saw. Sam refused to give Moe his money back. Moe was disgusted and threw the saw in the garbage "Dumpster".

Harry saw Moe's old saw in the garbage and took it. There was no owner's manual, but the saw was just like brand new. When he first used the saw it burst into flames and burned him.

Discuss all the theories under which Tom, Dick and Harry would seek to recover from Sam. Under which theories can they NOT recover?

Example Hypo 2 From June 2008

Twelve-year-old Charlie was riding on his small, motorized 3-wheeled all terrain vehicle (“ATV”) in his family’s large front yard. Suddenly, finding the steering wheel stuck in place, Charlie was unable to steer the ATV, and he panicked. Instead of applying the brakes or turning off the ATV, he jumped off of it and ran away. The ATV continued on its own, rolled out of the yard and into the residential street, directly in front of a car driven by Paul. Paul was sending a text message on his cell phone while driving. He failed to see the ATV roll into the street and he crashed into it. Although the ATV was not large, it was heavy enough that the accident caused serious personal injuries to Paul, and significant damage to his car.

An examination of the wreckage of the ATV showed that the steering wheel stuck because of a malfunction of the steering system. The ATV and the steering system are manufactured by KiddieRides-R-Us.

Under what theory or theories might Paul recover, and what is his likelihood of success, against:

a. Charlie?
b. KiddieRides-R-Us?

Discuss.


Definition

Under PRODUCT LIABILITY LAW a person who places an unreasonably dangerous product into the steam of commerce may be liable for the injury it causes. There are four basic theories on which a product liability action may be brought: Breach of Express Warranty, Breach of Implied Warranty, Negligence and Strict Liability. 

Unreasonably Dangerous

A product is unreasonably dangerous if it 1) poses serious and likely dangers, that 2) could be reduced or eliminated easily, 3) without damaging product utility, or else 4) the product utility does not justify the dangers posed. 

Example 1:

Here the product presented serious and likely dangers because it could burst into flame under normal use, and those dangers could have been eliminated or reduced easily by putting a warning on the saw.

Therefore this was an unreasonably dangerous product at the time of sale. 

Example 2:

Here, the facts state that K manufactured the ATV and the steering system. Because Charlie was riding the ATV in his yard, K would have to release the ATV into the stream of commerce so that it could be obtained by a consumer such as Charlie. The steering wheel stuck, demonstrating that the ATV was defective, and an unsteerable ATV is unreasonably dangerous as shown by the fact that Charlie could not control it and it rolled into the street in front of Paul’s car. Finally, the ATV caused injury because it rolled directly in front of Paul’s car while he was driving, and the facts says the accident caused Paul serious personal injuries as well as vehicle damage.

K may argue that the ATV did not cause the damage, Paul texting did, btu this issue will be discussed below under “Products liability (Negligence.)”

Thus, it appears that Paul may be able to prevail in a products liability case against K. 

Defect Types

In order to recover, it must be proved that the product is defective in:

Design (product designed as intended, but creates an unreasonable danger to consumers) - but beware of state of the art as a defense; if it’s unavoidably unsafe and its benefits outweighs its dangers, there may be no liability.

Manufacture (product is not made as intended) - look for product to be different from the rest due to bad assembly, materials, or parts

Warning (dangers not apparent to customers)

Example 1:

In order to recover, it must be proved that the product is defective in 1) design, 2) manufacturing, or 3) warning

Here, the facts state that the steering wheel stuck “because of malfunction in the steering system.” There is nothing in the facts to suggest that Charlie or anyone else changed the steering system after K sold i, so it can be assumed this defect existed when the ATV left K’s manufacturing plant. If all similar ATV’s of this model had the same defect, then it would be a design defect. However, since the facts don’t say this, it seems most likely that other similar ATV’s were okay, so this was most likely a manufacturing defect, which occurs when one product was not made as intended.

Because the facts state there was a malfunction,” the ATV had a defect.



Breach of Express Warranty

Def 1: Under tort law there is a BREACH OF EXPRESS WARRANTY, the plaintiff must show the defendant sold goods with express representations (express warranty) which made them unreasonably dangerous, and that it was the actual and proximate cause of injury to the plaintiff. 

Def 2: Under tort law there is a BREACH OF EXPRESS WARRANTY if a product is sold with 1) express representations that the buyer 2) relies on and 3) the representations are incorrect and 4) it causes the purchaser injury. The seller is liable to foreseeable plaintiffs, those with privity of contract or their family.

Example 1:

Here Sam made express representations to Tom because he said the saw "would cut 36in trees" and Tom relied because he "bought" the saw. This was incorrect because the saw would only cut "18in trees" and this caused injury because Tom was "burned" when the saw caught on fire. And Tom had privity of contract because he was a "purchaser". 

Therefore, Tom can recover under a breach of warranty theory. 

Example 2:

Here Dick cannot recover under breach of express warranty because Sam only said he was an "expert" and "recommended" the saw. These are not express misrepresentations. 

Example 3:

Here Harry did not buy the saw from Sam so there is no privity of contract between them and Harry was not a foreseeable plaintiff to Sam. Further, Sam made no express or implied representations to Harry. 

Therefore, Harry cannot recover based on breach of warranty. 

Breach of Implied Warranty

Def 1: Under tort law there is a BREACH OF IMPLIED WARRANTY theory, the plaintiff must show the defendant sold goods by representing they were safe for ordinary use or knowing the buyer's specific intended use (implied warranty), the goods were unreasonably dangerous for that use, and that it was the actual and proximate cause of injury to the plaintiff. 

Def 2: Under tort law there is a BREACH OF IMPLIED WARRANTY if a product is unsafe for ordinary use or for the buyer’s known intended use, the buyer relies on the expertise of the seller, and the buyer is injured as a result. The seller is liable to foreseeable plaintiffs, those with privity of contract or their family. 

Example 1:

Here Tom would argue he bought the saw for ordinary use, relied on Sam's expertise, and was injured as a result. Sam might argue that he did not know what Tom's intended use was, and there was no evidence Tom relied on his expertise.

Therefore, Tom can pursue recovery on a breach of implied warranty theory. 

Example 2:

Here Dick relied on Sam's expertise because Dick said he "didn't know" about saws and Sam said he was an "expert". And Sam knew Dick's intended use of the saw because he said he wanted to cut "24inc trees". Further, the saw was not safe because it could only cut 18inch logs, and this caused injury because the saw "caught fire" and Dick was "burned".

Therefore, Dick can recover under breach of implied warranty. 

Example 3:

Here Harry did not buy the saw from Sam so there is no privity of contract between them and Harry was not a foreseeable plaintiff to Sam. Further, Sam made no express or implied representations to Harry. 

Therefore, Harry cannot recover based on breach of warranty. 

Example 4:

Liability can be imposed against the manufacturer or seller of a product based upon the buyer’s reliance upon express and / or implied warranties that the goods are of merchantable quality and are fit for their intended purpose.

Here, there would be an implied warranty by K that the ATV was safe for riding, since riding would be its intended purpose. As discussed supra, the ATV’s steering mechanism malfunctioned, which meant it was unsafe to ride. 

Therefore, K can be held liable under a theory of Breach of Implied Warranty.

Negligence

Def 1: Under a Negligence theory the defendant has a duty not to place unreasonably dangerous goods into the stream of the commerce. The plaintiff must be a foreseeable plaintiff proximately caused injury by the negligent acts of the defendant.

Def 2: Negligence is a failure to use the care a reasonable person would in the same circumstance. To prevail the plaintiff must prove duty, breach, actual cause, proximate cause and damages.

Example 1:

DUTY?

Under tort law a person has a duty to not put an unreasonably dangerous product into the stream of commerce. Further, a person who makes express representations about a product assumes a duty of due care to make sure they are accurate and will not create peril.

Here Sam owed a DUTY because he was the seller of a product that posed foreseeable harm.

BREACH?

Sam BREACHED his duty because he "never read the owner's manual" and misrepresented the saw.

CAUSATION?

That was the ACTUAL CAUSE of his injury because he would not have been hurt if he did not buy the saw. This was also the PROXIMATE CAUSE of injury because it was the direct and foreseeable result.

DAMAGES?

Tom had INJURY because he was "burned".

Therefore, Tom could recover on a negligence Theory. 

Example 2:

Dick's rights under negligence is same as example 1. 

Example 3:

It is not clear that Sam was the PROXIMATE CAUSE of the injury to Harry because Moe's act of throwing the saw in the garbage appears to be an interceding event that breaks the cahin of causation.

Therefore, Harray's injury might be too remote in place and causation for recovery on a negligence theory. 

Example 4:

In order for a plaintiff to recover under a negligence theory of products liability, the plaintiff will have to prove duty, breach, causation, and damages.

Here, K had a duty to make a safe ATV, which would include a steering system that works properly. Since Charlie’s ATV had a malfunction, that is sufficient (at least under the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur) to show that K breached his duty to make a safe ATV.

K may argue that its duty extends to Charlie, not to Paul, but privity is not required to hold a manufacturer liable for injuries caused by a defective product, even including those who are bystanders.

“But for” the ATV’s steering malfunction, Charlie would not have panicked, the ATV would not have gone into the street, and Paul would not have hit it.

K will argue that Paul’s texting and resulting failure to see the ATV was an intervening act which led to the damage, and will also argue that Charlie’s failure to use the brakes or turn off the motor caused the accident. However, Charlie’s failure to brake is dependent intervening act because he wouldn’t have panicked if the steering hadn’t failed. Further, it is foreseeable that if an ATV’s steering malfunctions, the rider (especially one who is only 12 years old) might panic and jump off. Regarding Paul’s texting, this is an independent intervening act since Paul would have been texting even if the ATV’s steering had not malfunctioned. But the result of the malfunction is highly foreseeable since an ATV which is unsteerable is very likely to cause an accident. Thus, these events will probably not be enough to break the chain of causation.

Damages to Paul were discussed supra.

Therefore, since K had a duty to make a safe ATV and breached that duty, which was the actual and proximate cause of Paul’s damages, K will be held liable under a negligence theory of products liability.


Strict Product Liability 

Def 1: Under a Strict Liability theory, the plaintiff must show the seller was COMMERCIAL SUPPLIER, the product was unreasonably dangerous at the time it left the defendant's control, and defendant is only liable for non-economic damages. 

Def 2: Under tort law a commercial seller of a product is strictly liable for personal injury or property damage if the product is unreasonably dangerous at the time it leaves the seller. The seller is liable to any person who is injured as a result.

Example 1:

Here Sam was a commercial seller because he had a store, the "Bargain Center", selling the product. And the product was unreasonably dangerous because it "burst into flames" in normal use and had "no warnings on the saw". This caused Tom injury because he was "burned".

Therefore, Tom can recover under strict liability. 

Example 2:

Dick's rights under strict liability is same as example 1. 

Example 3:

Here Sam would argue that even though he originally put the saw into the stream of commerce, it was TAKEN OUT OF THE STREAM OF COMMERCE because Moe threw it in "garbage". Further, he would argue that Harry ASSUMED THE RISKS the saw as defective when he took it out of the garbage.

Therefore, Harry might not be able to recover under strict product liability. 

Example 4:

Strict liability may be imposed against a manufacturer or seller of a product which is defective and therefore unsafe for its anticipated use, or for failure to warn the consumer of an inherent danger involved in the use of the product when put to an intended or foreseeable use.

Here, the ATV was defective and thus unsafe for riding, which would be its anticipated use. Further, although Charlie was only 12, the ATV was small and manufactured by a company named “Kiddie Rides-R-Us,” which implies they make products for “Kiddies” to “ride.” It seems not only reasonable for Charlie to have been riding it, but also that he was probably a targeted market for K’s ATV sales. Additionally, if this product was not safe for 12-year-olds to ride, K should have warned of that, and no such warning is given in the facts.

Thus, K can be held liable under a theory of Strict Liability in Tort.


INTENTIONAL

In order for the plaintiff to recover on a theory of intent (battery), the plaintiff must prove that the manufacturer, distributor or supplier knew the product would cause harm.


MacPherson v. Buick

In this landmark case, Justice Cardozo dispensed with the previously applied requirement of privity of contract in products liability cases and extended the manufacturer’s duty of care to include the ultimate consumer of the product, whether or not the consumer was the actual purchaser of the product. Later cases extended the duty to include not just the purchaser or the ultimate consumer, but to include all persons and property likely to be endangered by the product's probable use, such as the consumer's family or guests, or even near bystanders.


Practice Question 3
The Macho-X99 chainsaw is a light-duty chainsaw designed for trees no bigger than 18". In the owner's manual said in big red letters, "WARNING -- NEVER TRY TO CUT DOWN A TREE BIGGER THAN 18" OR THIS SAW MIGHT CATCH FIRE." There were no warnings on the saw itself.
Tom went into Sam's Bargain Center. Sam told him, "This is the best chainsaw on the market. The Macho-X99 will cut trees up to 36" in diameter." Tom bought the Macho-X99 chainsaw.
Dick went into Sam's Bargain Center and said he didn't know much about chainsaws but needed one that could cut a tree about 24" in diameter. Sam told him, "I am an expert when it comes to chainsaws. I recommend this Macho-X99." Dick bought the Macho-X99 chainsaw.
Moe went into Sam's Bargain Center and bought the Macho-X99 chainsaw without any discussion.
Sam, Tom and Dick never read the owner's manual and were unaware of the potential fire danger. When Tom and Dick tried to cut down trees bigger than 18" the saws burst into flames and burned them.
Moe saw the warning in the owner's manual and tried to return the saw. Sam refused to give Moe his money back. Moe was disgusted and threw the saw in the garbage “Dumpster”.
Harry saw Moe's old saw in the garbage and took it. There was no owner's manual, but the saw was just like brand new. When he first used the saw it burst into flames and burned him.
Discuss all the theories under which Tom, Dick and Harry would seek to recover from Sam. Under which theories can they NOT recover?

[ANSWER EXPLANATION: This question calls for a discussion of the four theories of product liability. The facts are intended to illustrate the differences between express and implied breach along with the fact that strict product liability theory extends to remote plaintiffs.
The preliminary discussion of whether this is an “unreasonably dangerous product” or not is very, very important. Stating the “balance” test given here is MANDATORY if you want to score maximum points.
Be wary of products that are not really “unreasonably dangerous” at all because they have been extensively tested, have great utility (often saves lives), pose trivial risks (turns hair green) to a very small number of users (less than 0.05%), and what little danger they pose is totally unknown to the manufacturer or simply cannot be easily eliminated. That is NOT an unreasonably dangerous product!
As for Harry, it is not clear if a person can prevail on a products liability claim if the product has been discarded, scrapped or abandoned. The purpose of product liability law is to protect consumers and regular users of products, not “Dumpster Divers”. There is a strong argument that a product is no longer in the “stream of commerce” after it has been discarded or scrapped.
Here it seems that Harry put the product back in the stream of commerce by retrieving it from the Dumpster. Also he has assumed the risk by doing that since he knew or should have known something might be wrong with a product that has been discarded.]

Sample Answer 16-3: Product Liability
TOM V. SAM
Under PRODUCT LIABILITY LAW a person who places an unreasonably dangerous product into the steam of commerce may be liable for the injury it causes. There are four basic theories on which a product liability action may be brought: Breach of Express Warranty, Breach of Implied Warranty, Negligence and Strict Liability.
1) UNREASONABLY DANGEROUS?
A product is unreasonably dangerous if it 1) poses serious and likely dangers, that 2) could be reduced or eliminated easily, 3) without damaging product utility, or else 4) the product utility does not justify the dangers posed.
Here the product presented serious and likely dangers because it could burst into flame under normal use, and those dangers could have been eliminated or reduced easily by putting a warning on the saw.
Therefore this was an unreasonably dangerous product at the time of sale. 2) BREACH OF EXPRESS WARRANTY?
Under tort law there is a BREACH OF EXPRESS WARRANTY if a product is sold with 1) express representations that the buyer 2) relies on and 3) the representations are incorrect and 4) it causes the purchaser injury. The seller is liable to foreseeable plaintiffs, those with privity of contract or their family.
Here Sam made express representations to Tom because he said the saw "would cut 36" trees" and Tom relied because he "bought" the saw. This was incorrect because the saw would only cut "18" trees", and this caused injury because Tom was "burned" when the saw caught on fire. And Tom had privity of contract because he was a "purchaser."
Therefore, Tom can recover under a breach of warranty theory
3) BREACH OF IMPLIED WARRANTY?
Under tort law there is a BREACH OF IMPLIED WARRANTY if a product is unsafe for ordinary use or for the buyer’s known intended use, the buyer relies on the expertise of the seller, and the buyer is injured as a result. The seller is liable to foreseeable plaintiffs, those with privity of contract or their family.
Here Tom would argue he bought the saw for ordinary use, relied on Sam’s expertise, and was injured as a result. Sam might argue that he did not know what Tom’s intended use was, and there was no evidence Tom relied on his expertise.
Therefore Tom can pursue recovery on a breach of implied warranty theory.

4) NEGLIGENCE?
Negligence is a failure to use the care a reasonable person would in the same circumstance. To prevail the plaintiff must prove duty, breach, actual cause, proximate cause and damages.
DUTY? Under tort law a person has a duty to not put an unreasonably dangerous product into the stream of commerce. Further, a person who makes express representations about a product assumes a duty of due care to make sure they are accurate and will not create peril.
Here Sam owed Tom a DUTY because he was the seller of a product that posed foreseeable harm.
BREACH? Sam BREACHED his duty because he "never read the owner's manual" and misrepresented the saw.
CAUSATION? That was the ACTUAL CAUSE of his injury because he would not have been hurt if he did not buy the saw. This was also the PROXIMATE CAUSE of injury because it was the direct and foreseeable result.
DAMAGES? Tom had INJURY because he was "burned." Therefore, Tom could recover on a negligence theory.
5) STRICT PRODUCT LIABILITY?
Under tort law a commercial seller of a product is strictly liable for personal injury or property damage if the product is unreasonably dangerous at the time it leaves the seller. The seller is liable to any person who is injured as a result.
Here Sam was a commercial seller because he had a store, the "Bargain Center", selling the product. And the product was unreasonably dangerous because it "burst into flames" in normal use and had "no warnings on the saw." This caused Tom injury because he was "burned."
Therefore, Tom can recover under strict product liability.
DICK V. SAM
6) BREACH OF EXPRESS WARRANTY?
Breach of express warranty is defined above.
Here Dick cannot recover under breach of express warranty because Sam only said he was an "expert" and "recommended" the saw. These are not express misrepresentations.

7) BREACH OF IMPLIED WARRANTY? Breach of implied warranty is defined above.
Here Dick relied on Sam’s expertise because Dick said he “didn’t know” about saws and Sam said he was an “expert”. And Sam knew Dick’s intended use of the saw because he said he wanted to cut "24" trees". Further, the saw was not safe because it could only cut 18" logs, and this caused injury because the saw "caught fire" and Dick was "burned".
Therefore, Dick can recover under breach of implied warranty.
8) NEGLIGENCE or STRICT PRODUCT LIABILITY?
Dick's rights under negligence or strict product liability are the same as Tom's.
HARRY V. SAM
9) BREACH OF EXPRESS or IMPLIED WARRANTY? Breach of warranty is explained above.
Here Harry did not buy the saw from Sam so there is no privity of contract between them and Harry was not a foreseeable plaintiff to Sam. Further, Sam made no express or implied representations to Harry.
Therefore, Harry cannot recover based on breach of warranty.
10) NEGLIGENCE? Negligence is defined above.
It is not clear that Sam was the PROXIMATE CAUSE of the injury to Harry because Moe's act of throwing the saw in the garbage appears to be an interceding event that breaks the chain of causation.
Therefore, Harry's injury might be too remote in place and causation for recovery on a negligence theory.
11) STRICT PRODUCT LIABILITY? Strict Product Liability is discussed above.
Here Sam would argue that even though he originally put the saw into the stream of commerce, it was TAKEN OUT OF THE STREAM OF COMMERCE because Moe threw it in the “garbage”.

Further, he would argue that Harry ASSUMED THE RISKS the saw was defective when he took it
out of the garbage.
Therefore, Harry might not be able to recover under strict product liability.







