October 2015

QUESTION 2
Bob was an underpaid teller at Bank. On his lunch hour one day, he went into a store where he noticed a valuable necklace on the counter. He picked it up and put it in his pocket. Clare, a clerk at the store, approached Bob and asked him to put the necklace back. Bob punched Clare, returned the necklace to the counter, and fled back to Bank where he began waiting on customers.
One customer was Fred, Bob's close friend, who put down a ten-dollar bill and asked Bob for a roll of quarters. Bob then told Fred that he would secretly pass him one hundred dollars if Fred would later give him one-half. Fred agreed and later the two split the cash.
The next morning when Bob went to work, Marilyn, the bank manager, began questioning him in her office. Alarmed at this, Bob grabbed a letter opener and stabbed Marilyn in her arm. Then Bob fled outside, jumped in a car, and drove to the house of Gina, his girlfriend. He told Gina what had happened. Gina decided to call the police, but Bob knocked her unconscious, put her in his car and went to Fred's house to hide her.
Finding the door to Fred’s house locked, Bob broke in the door and hid Gina inside. At that point Fred appeared and protested to Bob. Bob struck Fred, pushing him down. As Fred fell, he knocked over a lamp and started a fire. Bob panicked and ran out of the house. The house began to burn. Fred got out alive, but Gina died in the fire.
What crimes, if any, did Bob commit? Discuss.
￼
STATE V. BOB
LARCENY
QUESTION 2: SELECTED ANSWER A
￼￼The trespassory taking and carrying away of the property of another with the specific intent to permanently deprive owner thereof.
Bob picked up a valuable necklace that was on the counter at the bank. The taking was trespassory because it did not belong to Bob and he did not have permission to take it. He put it in his pocket; this is sufficient movement to constitute as a carrying away. The property did not belong to Bob, so it was that of another's. Bob will argue that he did not intend to keep it, especially since he put the necklace back. The State will argue that since the facts indicate that Bob was an "underpaid teller" it is likely that Bob specifically meant to take it and deprive the owner thereof so he could have the value. Additionally, only after he was caught did he put it back.
Bob is guilty of larceny.
ASSAULT
Assault is either the substantial step towards the perpetration of an intended battery or the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of an imminent harmful application of force.
Substantial Step
Bob raised his arm to swing to punch Clare. The raising and swinging of his arm is a substantial step towards the perpetration of the subsequent hitting.
Bob is guilty of this type of assault, but it will merge with the subsequent battery.
￼￼
Reasonable Apprehension
Since Clare was facing Bob, she would have been able to see him raise his arm to swing at her. Given that she had just caught him stealing a necklace, Clare could have anticipated a violent response and would have been in reasonable apprehension when she saw him raise his arm.
Bob is guilty of this type of assault.
BATTERY
The unlawful application of force to another's person
Bob punched Clare. Punching is an application of force and it was applied to Clare, another person. Bob did not have a right to do so; thus it was unlawful.
Bob is guilty of battery.
SOLICITATION TO COMMIT EMBEZZLEMENT
Solicitation is the counseling, enticing or inciting of another with the intent for that person to commit a crime. Embezzlement is the fraudulent conversion of rightfully entrusted property with the intent to permanently deprive the owner thereof.
When Fred gave Bob a roll of quarters and asked for a ten-dollar bill, Bob told Fred that he would secretly give him $100. Bob enticed Fred to take the $100, instead of the $10 that he was owed, therefore depriving the bank (the owner) of the additional $90. Since Bob was a bank teller, he was rightfully entrusted with the money that he gave to Fred, but he converted the remaining $90 for purposes that were inconsistent with the Bank's ownership.
CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT EMBEZZLEMENT
An agreement between two or more parties to commit a crime.
￼￼￼￼
Embezzlement is the fraudulent conversion of rightfully entrusted property with the intent to permanently deprive the owner thereof.
Bob asked Fred to take the $100 and to split the extra cash with him. Fred agreed. Bob handed Fred the cash, which was a step towards the completion of the embezzlement.
Bob is guilty of conspiracy with Fred.
EMBEZZLEMENT OF $100
Embezzlement is the fraudulent conversion of rightfully entrusted property with the intent to permanently deprive the owner thereof.
When Fred gave Bob a roll of quarters and asked for a ten-dollar bill, Bob told Fred that he would secretly give him $100. Bob enticed Fred to take the $100, instead of the $10 that he was owed, therefore depriving the bank (the owner) of the additional $90. Since Bob was a bank teller, he was rightfully entrusted with the money that he gave to Fred, but he converted the remaining $90 for purposes that were inconsistent with the Bank's ownership. Bob may argue that he was merely in custody, rather than in possession, of the cash. If the court finds that this is true, then he will be guilty of larceny instead of embezzlement. See discussion infra.
Bob is guilty of embezzlement.
LARCENY OF $100
The trespassory taking and carrying away of the property of another with the specific intent to permanently deprive owner thereof.
Fred gave Bob a roll of quarters and asked for a ten-dollar bill. Bob told Fred that he would secretly give him $100. Bob enticed Fred to take the $100, instead of the $10 that he was owed, therefore depriving the bank (the owner) of the additional $90. If the
￼￼
court decides that Bob is a low-level employee, they will find that he only had custody over the cash instead of possession and will be found guilty for larceny instead of embezzlement.
AGGRAVATED ASSAULT OF MARILYN
Assault is either the substantial step towards the perpetration of an intended battery or the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of an imminent harmful application of force.
Substantial Step
Bob grabbed a letter opener to stab Marilyn. The grabbing and moving of his arm is a substantial step towards the perpetration of the subsequent stabbing.
Bob is guilty of this type of assault, but it will merge with the subsequent battery.
Reasonable Apprehension
Since Marilyn was facing Bob, she would have been able to see him grab the letter opener. Given that she had just caught him stealing, Marilyn could have anticipated a violent response and would have been in reasonable apprehension when she saw him raise his arm with the opener.
Aggravation
The letter opener was used as a deadly weapon, thus making this an aggravated crime.
Bob is guilty of this type of aggravated assault.
AGGRAVATED BATTERY
The unlawful application of force to another's person
Bob stabbed Marilyn. Stabbing is an application of force and it was applied to Marilyn, another person. Bob did not have a right to do so; thus it was unlawful.
￼￼￼￼￼
Aggravation
The letter opener was used as a deadly weapon, thus making this an aggravated crime.
Bob is guilty of aggravated battery.
ASSAULT of Gina
Assault is either the substantial step towards the perpetration of an intended battery or the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of an imminent harmful application of force.
Substantial Step
Bob raised his arm to swing to punch Gina. The raising and swinging of his arm is a substantial step towards the perpetration of the subsequent hitting.
Bob is guilty of this type of assault, but it will merge with the subsequent battery.
Reasonable Apprehension
Since Gina was facing Bob, she would have been able to see him raise his arm to swing at her. Given that she had just threatened to call the police, Gina could have anticipated a violent response and would have been in reasonable apprehension when she saw him raise his arm.
Bob is guilty of this type of assault.
BATTERY
The unlawful application of force to another's person
Bob knocked Gina out. Punching is an application of force and it was applied to Gina, another person. Bob did not have a right to do so; thus it was unlawful.
Bob is guilty of battery.
￼￼￼￼￼
KIDNAPPING
The unlawful confinement and asportation of another.
Bob knocked Gina out and made her unconscious. Since Gina was unconscious and could not escape, she was confined. Bob then put her in the car and took her to Fred's house. This is movement and asportation of Gina.
Bob is guilty of kidnapping
AGGRAVATED BURGLARY
Common Law
Burglary is the breaking and entering into the dwelling of another in the nighttime with the specific intent to commit a felony therein.
Breaking and entering
Bob went to Fred's house. Since the door was locked, he broke it. This is sufficient for a breaking. Bob then entered.
Dwelling of another
Facts indicate that this was Fred's house. A dwelling
Nighttime
The facts do not indicate whether this event happens at night or not. Night is defined as the period between sunset and sunrise. Since the fact pattern began in the morning, it is likely still the daytime.
Specific Intent to Commit a Felony
Bob intended to hide unconscious Gina in Fred's house. As discussed supra, this is a kidnapping and a felony sufficient enough for this element.
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼
Since it is likely not the nighttime, Bob is not guilty of common law burglary. However, if it is the nighttime, then he would be guilty.
MODERN LAW BURGLARY
The trespassory entering into any structure with the intent to commit a crime therein.
Trespassory
Bob did not have permission to be in Fred's house. Thus his entry was trespassory.
Any Structure
Fred's house is a structure.
Intent to commit a crime
Bob intended to commit kidnapping as discussed supra.
AGGRAVATION
Since the house was occupied by Fred when Bob broke in, this crime is aggravated.
Bob is guilty of aggravated burglary.
AGGRAVATED ARSON
Common Law
The malicious burning of the dwelling house of another.
Bob pushed Fred, causing him to knock over a lamp and start a fire. Bob will argue that he did not intend for the house to catch fire, and therefore his action was not malicious. The State will argue that he should have reasonably expected and known that pushing Fred would have caused the fire. Since the facts indicate the house began to burn, it is likely that at least charring to the structure had occurred.
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼
If the court finds that Bob should have known pushing Bob would cause fire, then he will be guilty of common law arson. If court finds he did not know, then he will not be found to be malicious and will not be guilty.
Modern Law
The malicious burning of any structure.
Fred's house is a structure. See discussion supra.
AGGRAVATION
Since the house was occupied by Fred when the fire started, this crime would be aggravated.
HOMICIDE OF GINA
Homicide is the killing of a human being by another human being.
Bob pushed Fred, causing a fire which killed Gina.
Actual Cause
But for Bob pushing Fred and causing a fire, Gina would not have died when and how she did.
Proximate Cause
Bob will argue that it is not foreseeable that pushing Fred into a lamp would have caused a fire. State will argue that pushing a person into a lamp, which is either electrical or open fire, it is reasonably foreseeable that a fire could catch on the house and cause death to people within the house.
Bob is the actual and proximate cause to Gina's death.
￼￼￼￼￼
MURDER
The unlawful killing of another human with malice aforethought. Malice may be proven in one of four ways:
Specific Intent to Kill
Bob pushed Fred into a lamp, causing the lamp to catch the house on fire, killing Gina. Bob will argue that in pushing Fred, he did not specifically intend to kill Gina; he intended to harm Fred.
State will not be able to prove malice under this theory.
Intent to Cause Serious Bodily Harm
Bob pushed Fred into a lamp, causing the lamp to catch the house on fire, killing Gina. Bob will argue that in pushing Fred, he did not specifically intend to harm Gina; he intended to harm Fred.
State will not be able to prove malice under this theory.
Depraved Heart Act
State will argue that pushing Fred into a lamp, while Gina was unconscious in the house was a wanton and reckless disregard for the value of human life. State will argue that Bob should have reasonably foreseen the risk of fire and acted recklessly in pushing Fred, knowing that Gina could not escape in the case of a fire.
State will likely be able to prove malice under this theory.
Felony Murder Rule
Gina's death occurred during the perpetration of a burglary. Bob may argue that the burglary was complete as he had already broken into the house and Gina was kidnapped. However, State will argue that the burglary had not been completed
￼￼￼￼￼
because Bob had not reached a place of safety. In fact, he was fighting with Fred in attempts to get away.
State will likely be able to prove malice under this theory.
FIRST-DEGREE MURDER
First-degree murder is murder that is committed with the intent to kill with premeditation and deliberation, through bomb, poison, ambush, torture or mutilation, or through the commission of an inherently dangerous felony.
Bob will argue that he did not have the intent to kill, and thus could not have premeditated or deliberated. However, State will argue that Gina's death occurred during the perpetration of a burglary. Bob may argue that the burglary was complete as he had already broken into the house and Gina was kidnapped. However, State will argue that the burglary had not been completed because Bob had not reached a place of safety. In fact, he was fighting with Fred in attempts to get away. Bob may also argue that burglary and kidnapping are not inherently dangerous felonies.
Bob is likely guilty of first-degree murder under the felony murder rule.
SECOND-DEGREE MURDER
Second-degree murder is murder that is committed with the specific intent to kill, without premeditation, with the specific intent to cause serious bodily harm, depraved heart act, or a felony insufficient to support felony murder rule.
If the State is unable to prove first-degree murder under the felony murder rule, then they may argue the depraved heart act and that pushing Fred into a lamp, while Gina was unconscious in the house, was a wanton and reckless disregard for the value of human life. State will argue that Bob should have reasonably foreseen the risk of fire and acted recklessly in pushing Fred, knowing that Gina could not escape in the case of a fire.
￼￼
At the very least, Bob will be guilty of second-degree murder.

PEOPLE v. BOB
QUESTION 2: SELECTED ANSWER B
Larceny of Necklace
Under common law, Larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away of the property of another with the intent to permanently deprive.
Here, there was a "taking" when Bob put the necklace in his pocket from the store counter. There was a "carrying away" because he "moved" the necklace from its original location and he had the intent to permanently deprive because he put it in his pocket to steal a "valuable necklace" and when he got caught by the store clerk, he "returned the necklace to the counter and fled" back to his work.
Therefore, Bob will be charged with larceny of the necklace.
Assault on Clare (store clerk)
Under criminal law, assault is the intentional act to cause a battery or immediate apprehension of a battery, the harmful or offensive touching of another person.
Here, when Clare approached Bob and told him to put the necklace back, Bob punched Clare. Bob "intentionally" acted to commit a battery on Clare and the charge of assault will be included with the higher charge of battery.
Battery on Clare
Under criminal law, battery is the intentional harmful or offensive touching of another person.
￼￼￼
Here, as discussed supra, when Bob "punched Clare" he intended to punch her and commit battery on her because she caught him stealing the necklace.
Therefore, Bob will be charged with battery on Clare.
Solicitation of Fred (friend) for embezzlement
Under criminal law, Solicitation is the urging of another person to commit a crime. The crime of solicitation is completed once the urging occurs and it does not matter if the person urged actually completes the crime or not. The crime of solicitation merges with the urged crime, if completed, and the person is vicariously liable for those crimes under the theory of accomplice liability.
Here, when Bob told Fred that he would "secretly pass him a one hundred dollar bill" instead of the roll of quarters that he requested, Bob was soliciting, "urging" Fred to commit a crime of accepting stolen property that he was embezzling from the bank. Because the "urging" was completed, Bob will be charged with the solicitation of Fred for the crime of embezzlement.
Conspiracy with Fred for Embezzlement
Under common law, Conspiracy is an agreement between 2 or more people to work toward an illegal goal. Modernly, an overt act is required in furtherance of the commission of the crime / conspiracy goal. The crime of conspiracy does not "merge" with other crimes so the defendant may be charged with both the crime of conspiracy as well as the completed crimes that are also committed.
Here, when Bob told Fred that he would secretly pass him the $100 and they would split it AND when Fred "agreed" and later split the cash with Bob, there was an "agreement" between Bob and Fred to steal / embezzle the $100 from the bank, an illegal goal.
Bob will be charged with a separate charge of conspiracy with Fred.
￼￼
Embezzlement of bank $100
Under criminal law, Embezzlement is the taking of money with the intent to permanently deprive or putting at substantial risk, money or items that are lawfully in your possession that legally belong to someone else.
Here, when Bob purposely gave Fred the $100 instead of the roll of quarters, he took the money that was "lawfully in his possession" because he was a bank teller and used the money to perform his job. When Bob gave the $100 to Fred for them "to split the money" he intended to permanently deprive the bank of this money and did not intend to return it.
Therefore, Bob will be charged with embezzlement.
Assault of Marilyn (bank manager)
Assault is defined supra. Here, when Bob became alarmed when Marilyn began questioning him about the $100, he stabbed her in the arm with a letter opener. Because his "intent" was to cause her bodily harm and apprehension, Bob committed assault on Marilyn.
Bob will be charged with assault of Marilyn which will merge with the charge of Battery if he is successfully charged.
Battery of Marilyn
Battery is defined supra. Here, when Bob intentionally "stabbed Marilyn in the arm with a letter opener", he committed a "harmful and offensive touching" to Marilyn.
Therefore, Bob will be charged with the battery of Marilyn.
￼￼￼
Larceny of Car
Larceny is defined supra. Here, when Bob fled outside the bank, because he "jumped in a car", it is presumed that it was not his car. If in fact, the car was not his or he did not have permission to use, a larceny may have been committed (grand theft) since he "took and carried” (drove away) the car of someone else. If Bob had the intent to NOT return the car, but to keep it or discard it when he was done with it, then there was an "intent to permanently deprive" and the elements of larceny are met.
If, however, Bob was just "borrowing" the car in his moment of panic to flee the bank because he had just stabbed Marilyn in the arm, then this element may not be met if he did not have the "intent to permanently deprive" the rightful owner. Additionally, it must also be considered that Bob's fleeing may be considered part of the chain of events from the stabbing of Marilyn since he had not yet reached a place of relative safety.
Therefore, Bob may be charged with larceny of the car.
Kidnapping of Gina (girlfriend)
Under criminal law, kidnapping is the wrongful taking or confinement of another person against their will. Under common law, it was required that the victim be transported across state lines. However, modernly that requirement has been dropped and is no longer required.
Here, because Bob knocked Gina unconscious and took her and put her in his car against her will because she was going to call the police, Bob "wrongfully took" Gina and "confined" her to the car when she was unconscious.
Therefore, Bob will be charged with the kidnapping of Gina.
￼￼
Assault / Battery of Gina
Assault and battery are discussed supra. Here, when Bob knocked Gina unconscious, he committed assault and battery on her. He will also be charged with battery in addition to kidnapping Gina.
Burglary of Fred's house
Under common law, burglary is the breaking and entering the dwelling house of another at nighttime with the intent to commit a felony inside. Modernly, the rule has been extended to include any structure at any time of day and includes larceny as the intended crime, even if it is not a felony by statute.
In this case, Bob went to Fred's house to hide Gina whom he had kidnapped. Because Fred's house was "locked", Bob "broke the door and hid Gina inside" without Fred's permission or knowledge. Therefore, Bob both under common law and modernly committed "breaking and entering". However, the facts do not indicate the time of day. If it was during daytime the common law element would not be met. However, modernly this requirement is waived. Because Bob entered "Fred's house" this is the dwelling house of another. Bob intended to break into Fred's house to "hide Gina who had kidnapped", which is a felony.
The defense may argue that Bob had already committed the kidnapping when he knocked Gina unconscious and put her in the car, so the requirement to commit a felony inside of Fred's house is not met because he had already committed that crime. However, the prosecution will argue that Bob was still in the commission of committing the crime of kidnapping which would last the entire duration of her illegal confinement including when he took her to Fred's house to "hide her".
Therefore, it is likely that Bob will be charged modernly with Burglary of Fred's house.
￼￼
Assault / Battery of Fred
Assault and battery are discussed supra. Here, when Bob struck Fred when he "protested to Bob", and Bob "pushed him down", Bob committed assault and battery of Fred.
Arson of Fred's house
Under common law, Arson is the malicious burning of the dwelling of another. Modernly, the rule has been extended to include any structure and malice means "with wrongful intent". The burning must include more than smoke and must include damage to include charring and actual burning.
In this case, because Fred fell and knocked over the lamp and started the fire, Bob did not intend to commit arson as he did not want or intend to start a fire.
Bob will not be charged with the arson for the burning of Fred's house.
Homicide / Murder of Gina in Fire
Homicide is the unlawful killing of another, which includes murder and manslaughter. Murder is the unlawful killing of another with malice aforethought. Malice aforethought can be accomplished in one of four ways: 1) intent to kill, 2) intent to cause severe bodily injury, 3) an extremely reckless disregard for an unjustifiably high risk to human life or 4) through the Felony Murder Rule.
FELONY MURDER RULE
The felony murder rule applies a first-degree murder charge to the defendant if the death occurred as a result of the commission of an independent inherently dangerous felony (burglary, arson, rape, robbery and / or kidnapping).
￼￼￼
Here, as discussed supra, Bob may be charged with both burglary and kidnapping and therefore the death of Gina occurred during the commission of an inherently dangerous felony and therefore malice is presumed for a charge of first-degree murder.
Therefore, Bob will likely be charged with first-degree murder under the Felony Murder Doctrine for the death of Gina in the fire.
FIRST-DEGREE MURDER
First-degree murder is murder that requires premeditation, deliberation and a specific intent to kill. Here the facts do not support that Bob intended the death of anyone and he did not plan in advance the death of Gina or anyone else.
Therefore, Bob will not be charged with first-degree murder because there was no premeditation or specific intent to kill.
SECOND-DEGREE MURDER
All murder other than first-degree murder is second-degree murder, which requires a wanton or reckless disregard or an unjustifiable risk to human life. Here, it can be argued that Bob's actions were wanton and reckless in that "he panicked and ran out of the house as it began to burn".
However, although a strong case can be made for second-degree murder, Bob will be charged with first-degree murder under felony murder.
AFFIRMATIVE DUTY TO ACT
A person generally does not have a duty to assist others unless the person created that person's peril. Here, because Bob knocked Gina unconscious, kidnapped her and took

her to Fred's house which caught on fire, he had a duty to assist her in her peril and to attempt to save her.
Because Bob fled and did not attempt to assist Gina out of the burning fire when he had an affirmative duty because he placed her in peril, Bob will be charged with the murder of Gina.
VOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER
Under criminal law, voluntary manslaughter is the intentional killing of another person that would be murder but for the existence of legally adequate provocation.
Here, there is not evidence to support that a reasonable person would have been provoked to act as Bob did under the same circumstances.
Therefore, Bob does not have a mitigating defense of adequate provocation and voluntary manslaughter will not apply.
INVOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER
Under criminal law, involuntary manslaughter is the unintentional killing of another person by means of gross criminal negligence, a deliberate breach of a pre-existing duty to protect others from risk of harm OR by recklessness, a deliberate creation of risk to others.
Here, because Bob did not intend to kill Gina, but his acts were extremely reckless, Bob would at a minimum be charged with involuntary manslaughter if the felony murder charge did not hold up.

_____________________________________________________________________________

October 2014

QUESTION 3
Steve and Frank became acquainted at a correctional facility for mentally ill violent offenders. Steve was an inmate who had to take antipsychotic medication to prevent paranoia. Frank was employed as a kitchen helper. Once they discovered that they both wanted to be actors, they hatched a scheme to kidnap a famous actor, Art, upon Steve’s release from the facility, and to show him their acting skills. They believed that, once Art saw how talented they were, he would help them get acting jobs. They would then release him.
When Steve was released, he stopped taking his antipsychotic medication. As a result, he went in and out of paranoia. On bad days, he developed a belief that Frank had supernatural powers and that he had to do what Frank said or Frank would kill him. While Frank knew Steve was mentally ill, he was not aware of the severity of his illness.
Steve and Frank located Art’s house, kidnapped him and took him to a remote location. During the kidnapping, Steve believed that Art was going with them willingly to assist them in their acting careers. After they arrived at the location, and while Frank was out, Steve beat Art and took his wallet. In a panic, Steve stole a car and drove away at a high rate of speed.
A police officer followed Steve and tried to stop him. Steve, believing the kidnapping, battery, and robbery had been discovered, attempted to escape by driving greatly in excess of the speed limit. During the high speed chase, the officer’s car spun out of control and he died in the accident.
1. What charges, if any, can reasonably be brought against Frank for the beating of Art and the taking of his wallet? Discuss.
2. What charges, if any, can reasonably be brought against Frank for the death of the police officer? Discuss.
3. What defenses, if any, can Steve reasonably raise against a charge of kidnapping Art? Discuss.

QUESTION 3: SELECTED ANSWER A
State v. Frank for Battery and Robbery of Art
Accomplice Liability
At common law, all parties to a crime were labeled accessory before the fact, accessory after the fact, a primary or secondary accomplice. Here, both Steve and Frank are primary accomplices as they are effectuating the kidnapping. As such, they will be liable for all foreseeable crimes that occur during the perpetration of the kidnapping of Art.
Art would argue that the he did not participate in the battery or robbery of Art as he had left the location where Steve beat Art and he had only agreed to a kidnapping. This argument would fail because Frank knew Steve was mentally ill and was not in full control of his capacities. Frank left Steve alone with Art even though he wasn't sure of the extent of Frank's mental illness. The kidnapping was using force and it would be foreseeable that Steve would continue to use force to detain Art.
Frank would argue it wasn't foreseeable that physical force would be used after the kidnapping had occurred and they were sitting in a remote location. His intent was to get discovered as an actor not an intent on his part to steal Art's wallet.
Frank would lose as the continuation of kidnapping and the battery and larceny of the wallet that continued within the crime were foreseeable.
Conspiracy
At common law, conspiracy is an agreement between two or more people to commit an illegal act. Modernly, most jurisdictions require an overt act.

Steve and Frank hatched a scheme to kidnap an actor. The hatching is the agreement for the illegal purpose of kidnapping. In some states, simply agreeing to kidnap Art is the act needed, while in others the overt act was going to Art's house and actually kidnapping him. Under either view this crime is complete because they kidnapped Art from his home and took him to a remote location.
Under the Pinkerton Rule, once the conspiracy is formed, coconspirators are liable for all the actions of all their partners in furtherance of the conspiracy. Frank would argue that the beating and theft of the wallet were not in furtherance of the conspiracy, that the conspiracy was only kidnapping. However, the crime of kidnapping was continuing, they had not let Art free nor had Frank tried to withdraw so he is liable for all the criminal acts of Steve.
State v. Frank death of police officer Accomplice liability supra Conspiracy supra
Robbery
Is the trespassory taking and carrying away of the tangible personal property of another (trespassory taking is wrongful) with the intent to steal (permanently deprive) plus the use of force or threat of force. Here, Frank's co-conspirator beat (use of force) Art and took his wallet (tangible personal property) and left the remote location (carrying away).
Homicide
Is the death of a human being by defendant’s acts.

Actual Cause
Requires but for the defendant’s wrongful act, the officer would not have died. Here, had Frank not participated in this criminal venture with Steve, the police officer wouldn't have chased a scared Steve and died.
Proximate Cause
It is foreseeable that a police officer would die when engaged in a high speed chase.
Murder
Murder is a homicide committed with Malice.
Malice can be proven in one of four ways, intent to kill, intent to cause serious bodily injury, wanton & willful conduct and the felony murder rule.
Here, Steve Frank's liability would rest on the felony murder rule if the police officer died within the commission of an inherently dangerous felony. There is a split of jurisdictions on an inherently dangerous felony definition; some define it as the manner in which the felony is carried out and some define it by statute. Burglary, arson, robbery, rape and kidnapping all qualify as felony murders. Frank would argue that this death would not fall within the felony murder rule because the officer’s death occurred after Steve had left his place of apparent safety and abandoned the kidnapping. This argument would fail because Steve was speeding away from the police thinking that the kidnapping, robbery and battery had been discovered. Steve was still in the commission of his criminal acts, which Frank shared accomplice liability for.
If the court found that the Felony murder rule did not apply, then the death of the officer would be determined as a 2nd degree murder.

There are no defenses available to Frank.
Defenses of Steve
Steve would assert an insanity defense. Under the M'Naghten rule, a person is not liable for his criminal acts if he cannot understand either the nature or character of his acts.
The "right or wrong" test requires that the defendant due to mental disease or defect cannot cognitively realize that what he is doing is wrong. If an "irresistible impulse" jurisdiction the defendant would argue that he didn't have the volitional, physical capacity to control his behavior. The model penal code standard uses both of those tests combined. Finally, in the federal courts and one state, Steve could assert the "Durham" test which states that if the act is a product of his mental disease, he is not guilty by reason of insanity. Steve's history of mental illness in a correctional facility, the medications he takes for the illness, the effect of paranoia in the majority jurisdiction of M'Naghten would mean Steve's mental disease of paranoia made it impossible for him to know what he was doing was wrong.

State v. Frank
QUESTION 3: SELECTED ANSWER B
￼Solicitation
Encouraging another to commit a crime with the intent they do it.
Here the facts do not clearly show who instigated the idea to kidnap Art. In any case this crime would merge, with Conspiracy and the target crime.
Conspiracy
Two or more persons agreeing to commit a crime. Modernly it requires an act in
furtherance of the crime.
Here, Frank and Steve “hatched a scheme to kidnap ... Art.” Kidnapping is a crime and they agreed to do it. They “located Art’s house” – an act in furtherance of the kidnapping.
Frank is guilty of Conspiracy.
Pinkerton’s rule – Accomplice liability
Under Pinkerton, all conspirators are responsible for all of the foreseeable crimes in
furtherance of the conspiracy.
Frank will be guilty of all foreseeable crimes committed by Steve during the kidnapping.
Battery
Unlawful force to another.
￼￼￼￼￼
Here, “Steve beat Art” during the kidnapping. Normally, battery of some sort occurs during and as part of a kidnapping and is a lesser included offense that merges with the kidnapping.
In this case, the battery was not incident to the kidnapping and may be charged separately.
Frank may be charged with battery as part of the kidnapping; however, if this battery was not a foreseeable part of the conspiracy, Frank will not be guilty of Frank beating Art.
Larceny
Trespassory taking and asportation of the property of another with the intent to
permanently deprive.
Here, Steve “took Art’s wallet;” since it was during Art’s kidnapping, it would have been from his person, thus a ‘trespassory taking.’ Steve ‘drove away’ with the wallet, satisfying asportation. There is nothing to suggest he meant to return it at any time, since he fled “in a panic.”
There is a larceny by Steve.
Robbery
Larceny (supra) by force or intimidation.
Steve’s taking Art’s wallet after beating him suggests the wallet was taken by force. Steve committed Robbery.
As above, if these were the foreseeable consequences of the conspiracy, Frank will be charged with Robbery in the taking of Art’s wallet.
￼￼￼￼￼
Frank will argue the Battery and Robbery were not foreseeable; however the State will point out that these are foreseeable crimes and do occur in many kidnappings.
Frank will be charged for all, including the death of the police officer. Murder
Homicide
One person causing the death of another.
Causation
Actual
But for Steve speeding away the officer wouldn’t have died.
Proximate
It is foreseeable that an officer in pursuit at high speed could lose control of his
car and die.
We have homicide.
Malice
May be shown in various ways.
Intent to kill/commit great bodily harm Not evidenced in facts.
Felony Murder Rule (FMR)
Death during commission of an enumerated felony shows malice – Kidnapping (infra) is such a felony.
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼
Wanton and Reckless Conduct
Driving at ‘excessively high speeds’ is wanton and reckless.
We have Malice.
Murder in the First Degree (M1)
May be shown in various ways, including
FMR
If death occurs during the enumerated felony – Kidnapping (infra) – M1 may be
charged.
Here, Steve was attempting to escape pursuit from the scene of the kidnapping. He had not reached a place of safety; thus the officer died as a part of the kidnapping.
M1 may be charged. If this fails:
Murder in the Second Degree (M2)
Death as a result of Wanton and Reckless disregard of life and safety may be
charged as M2, which falls under all Murder that is not M1.
Here Steve “attempted to escape driving greatly in excess of the speed limit.” This shows Depraved Heart because such action is likely to harm or kill someone.
If the court does not find Murder, the death of the officer would be:
Voluntary Manslaughter (VM)
Death due to criminal negligence.
￼￼￼￼￼￼
Here in addition to the ‘high speed,’ Steve drove “in excess of the speed limit “ – a statutory violation. Thus VM may be charged under Misdemeanor Manslaughter as well as Criminal Negligence.
Frank will be chargeable, as such flight and its consequences are the foreseeable result of the conspiracy (Pinkerton) (supra).
Kidnapping
Taking and moving another without Justification or Excuse.
Here the facts state that the kidnapping occurred as the result of the conspiratorial acts of Frank and Steve.
Defenses for Steve
Insanity
Steve will claim that he was not responsible for his actions.
M’Naughton
Steve will argue he could not understand what he was doing since “Steve believed
that Art was going with them willingly.”
Steve’s illness doesn’t meet M’Naughton though because “he went in and out of
paranoia.” Also, Steve knew what he had done since he “believed the kidnapping...had been discovered.”
Irresistable Impulse
Steve’s following Frank’s direction may fall under this during a paranoid episode
but will also fail.
￼￼￼￼￼￼
Model Penal Code
As a blend of the above defenses, Steve’s best defense is that due to his illness,
he didn’t have the necessary intent at the time of the kidnapping.
These will all likely fail as, when he was aware and fleeing, he didn’t abandon the crimes.


_____________________________________________________________________________


October 2013

QUESTION 2
Alma believed that Ed, her employer, had cheated her out of overtime pay. She asked her friend, Bob, a locksmith, to open a locked drawer in Ed’s desk so that she could obtain confidential documents for use in embarrassing Ed into paying her what she thought he owed her. Bob said he would help her.
Alma took Bob to Ed’s office, where he opened the locked desk drawer. Just after Alma and Bob had removed the confidential documents from the drawer, Ed came into the office. Startled, he chased Bob onto a balcony and pushed him. Bob fell over the balcony railing and landed on Diane, who was walking on the sidewalk below. Bob was unharmed but Diane died instantly.
1. With what crimes, if any, can Alma reasonably be charged, and what defenses, if any, can she reasonably raise? Discuss.
2. Withwhatcrimes,ifany,canBobreasonablybecharged,andwhatdefenses,ifany, can he reasonably raise? Discuss.
3. With what crimes, if any, can Ed reasonably be charged, and what defenses, if any, can he reasonably raise? Discuss.

QUESTION 2 – SELECTED ANSWER A
1. ALMA'SCRIMES
Alma's Solicitation of Burglary, or In the Alternative Larceny, and Extortion, Merges with the Target Crimes.
Solicitation is the act of requesting, demanding, or encouraging the commission of a specific crime not already planned by another, whether they agree or not. If the target crime is committed, it merges with that charge. Actual and proximate causation must be met.
Here, Alma "asked her friend, Bob, a locksmith, to open a locked drawer in Ed's desk" in Ed's office for purposes of stealing confidential documents to use for her planned extortion. Causation is met because had she not requested Bob's help, the solicitation would not have occurred. Alma is guilty of solicitation, but because the target crimes were committed, it merges, and she will not be charged with solicitation.
Alma's Conspiracy to Commit Burglary, or In the Alternative Larceny, and Extortion, Does not Merge with the Target Crimes.
Conspiracy is the act of agreeing with one or more other people to commit a specific crime or series of crimes with the intent to make such agreement where at least one party believes there is an agreement (in most jurisdictions) and a co-conspirator has made an overt act, including minor preparation, in furtherance of the conspiracy (again in most jurisdictions).
Bob agreed with Alma to break into Ed's drawer for Alma's extortion purposes when he "said he would help her"; Alma intended to make an agreement to commit a crime, did make such agreement, and her actions when she took Bob to Ed's office meet the overt act and show she believed there was such agreement. Causation is met because she would not have entered the agreement had she not asked Bob for help in the commission of a crime. Alma is guilty of conspiracy.
￼￼￼￼
Alma May be Guilty of Burglary.
Burglary at common law was the breaking and entering of the dwelling of another at night with intent to commit a felony. Today it is the entering of any structure of another without license with intent to commit a crime at any time of day, whether breaking or not, in most jurisdictions. Both actual and proximate causation must be met.
Here, Alma and Bob entered Ed's office, a structure, without license, with the intent to steal confidential documents, a crime. Causation is met because the entering of Ed's office with such intent would not have occurred but for Alma taking Bob there, and the result is not too remote or accidental, meeting both actual and proximate causation (as defined by the MPC).
Alma May be Guilty of Larceny, a Lesser Included Offense of Burglary.
Larceny is the taking away by trespass of the personal property of another with intent to permanently deprive them of possession. Actual and proximate causation must be met.
If not all the elements of Burglary are met, Alma may be charged with larceny, because she and Bob removed the documents from Bob's desk. This analysis may be necessary because Ed is Alma's employer, so entering his office may not have qualified for burglary, if she had license to do so. Causation for larceny is met because the documents would not have been taken had Alma not asked Bob to help her take them and brought him to the scene where they were then taken. However, she certainly did not have license to do so for the purpose of stealing documents, so the license should not be recognized, and burglary most likely will be charged.
￼￼
Alma May be Guilty of Attempted Extortion.
Extortion is a modern crime where possession or title of personal property or money is transferred to the defendant by means of threat. Here, Alma intends to use the confidential documents to threaten Ed with embarrassment, resulting in him paying her money. It is irrelevant that she believes he owes her overtime pay because she is still guilty of the attempt to extort payment by threat of embarrassment. Causation is met because she would not have taken the substantial step toward threatening Ed with embarrassment to get him to give her money if she hadn't entered his office with the intent to steal the documents for this purpose.
Alma is Guilty of Felony Murder if She is Guilty of Burglary, Because Diane's Death is Foreseeable.
Homicide is the act or omission resulting in the death of another human. Involuntary manslaughter is to do so recklessly or grossly negligently; voluntary manslaughter is to do so with intent to kill but adequately provoked by the victim; second-degree murder is to do so with malice aforethought either through reckless disregard for extreme risk to human life or intent to kill (either express or implied), and first-degree murder is to do so with premeditation and deliberation or during the commission of a felony before the defendant has reached safe haven. Actual and proximate causation must be met.
Here, Alma entered Ed's office without license with the intent to commit larceny and/or extortion. This should be sufficient to convict her of burglary. If so, Dianne's death occurred during the course of the burglary when Bob fell on her; she would not have died but for the burglary, and because Ed pushing Bob was a reacting intervening force directly from the burglary itself, her death was not so unforeseeable as to break causation -- it is not too remote or accidental.
ALMA'S DEFENSES
Alma's Defense Against the Agreement of Conspiracy Likely Fails.
￼￼￼￼
Alma may claim she merely asked Bob to help her, and is therefore not guilty of the solicitation which merges with the target crime, but this fails because the facts appear more as if the two are acting as if they have an agreement, rather than Alma simply giving Bob instructions.
Alma's Lack of Specific Intent Defense to Burglary, Larceny, and Extortion Fails.
Burglary, larceny, and extortion all require specific intent, not general intent. Alma made a plan in advance and found a partner in crime to carry it out, she intended the burglary, or in the alternative larceny, and extortion.
Alma's Lack of Intent to Permanently Deprive of Possession Defense to Larceny Probably Fails.
Alma may claim she never intended to keep the documents, but this may fail because the facts don't tell us she intended to replace them once she accomplished her goal, and she may have had no incentive to do so, leading to the presumption she didn't intend to.
Alma Cannot Reasonably Make a Necessity or Duress Defense. Alma's Defense to Felony Murder of Superseding Cause Fails.
As stated earlier, Ed pushing Bob was not a superseding cause because it was directly reacting to the burglary itself.
2. BOB'SCRIMES
Bob's Conspiracy to Commit Burglary, or In the Alternative Larceny, and Extortion, Does not Merge with the Target Crimes.
Conspiracy is the act of agreeing with one or more other people to commit a specific crime or series of crimes with the intent to make such agreement where at least one party believes there is an agreement (in most jurisdictions) and a co-conspirator has
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼
made an overt act, including minor preparation, in furtherance of the conspiracy (again in most jurisdictions).
Bob agreed with Alma to break into Ed's drawer for Alma's extortion purposes when he "said he would help her"; Bob intended to make an agreement to commit a crime, did make such agreement, and his actions when he went with Alma to Ed's office meet the overt act and show he believed there was such agreement. Causation is met because he would not have entered the agreement had he not intended for the crime to occur. Bob is guilty of conspiracy.
Bob May be Guilty of Burglary.
Burglary at common law was the breaking and entering of the dwelling of another at night with intent to commit a felony. Today it is the entering of any structure of another without license with intent to commit a crime at any time of day, whether breaking or not, in most jurisdictions. Both actual and proximate causation must be met.
Here, Alma and Bob entered Ed's office, a structure, without license, with the intent to steal confidential documents, a crime. Causation is met because the entering of Ed's office with such intent would not have occurred but for Alma taking Bob there, and the result is not too remote or accidental, meeting both actual and proximate causation (as defined by the MPC).
Bob May be Guilty of Larceny, a Lesser Included Offense of Burglary.
Larceny is the taking away by trespass of the personal property of another with intent to permanently deprive them of possession. Actual and proximate causation must be met.
If not all the elements of burglary are met, Bob may be charged with larceny, because Alma and Bob removed the documents from Ed's desk. This analysis may be necessary because Ed is Alma's employer, so entering his office may not have qualified for burglary, if she had license to do so. Causation for larceny is met because the
￼￼
documents would not have been taken had Alma not asked Bob to help her take them and brought him to the scene where they were then taken.
Pinkerton will Hold Bob Liable for All Alma's Foreseeable Crimes in Furtherance of the Conspiracy.
Bob is guilty of all foreseeable crimes Alma commits in furtherance of the conspiracy. So even if he is unaware of the plan to commit extortion, it is foreseeable so Bob will be guilty of that as well.
Bob May be Guilty of Attempted Extortion Through Co-conspirator Liability, Because He Likely Knew Alma's Purpose for the Burglary.
Extortion is a modern crime where possession or title of personal property or money is transferred to the defendant by means of threat. Here, Alma intends to use the confidential documents to threaten Ed with embarrassment, resulting in him paying her money. It is irrelevant that she believes he owes her overtime pay because she is still guilty of the attempt to extort payment by threat of embarrassment. Causation is met because she would not have taken the substantial step toward threatening Ed with embarrassment to get him to give her money if she hadn't entered his office with the intent to steal the documents for this purpose.
If Alma's extortion plan was known to Bob or even if it was merely foreseeable, Bob will be guilty as well.
Bob is Guilty of Felony Murder through Co-conspirator Liability if He is Guilty of Burglary, Because Diane's Death is Foreseeable.
Homicide is the act or omission resulting in the death of another human. Involuntary manslaughter is to do so recklessly or grossly negligently; voluntary manslaughter is to do so with intent to kill but adequately provoked by the victim; second-degree murder is to do so with malice aforethought either through reckless disregard for extreme risk to human life or intent to kill (either express or implied), and first-degree murder is to do so
￼￼￼￼￼￼
with premeditation and deliberation or during the commission of a felony before the defendant has reached safe haven. Actual and proximate causation must be met.
Here, Alma entered Ed's office without license with the intent to commit larceny and/or extortion. This should be sufficient to convict her of burglary. If so, Dianne's death occurred during the course of the burglary when Bob fell on her; she would not have died but for the burglary, and because Ed pushing Bob was a reacting intervening force directly from the burglary itself, her death was not so unforeseeable as to break causation -- it is not too remote or accidental.
Even if Bob is not guilty of conspiracy, which he is, he participated in the burglary during the course of which Diane's foreseeable death occurred, and Bob is guilty of Felony Murder.
BOB'S DEFENSES
Bob's Lack of Specific Intent Defense to Burglary, Larceny, and Extortion Fails.
Burglary, larceny, and extortion all require specific intent, not general intent. Alma made a plan in advance and found a partner in crime to carry it out; she intended the burglary, or in the alternative larceny, and extortion.
Bob's Defense Against the Agreement of Conspiracy Likely Fails.
Conspiracy agreement can be implied through actions not just expressed through words, and the facts show Bob and Alma acting together as they burglarize Ed's office, so he will be found to have entered an agreement.
Bob's Defense to Felony Murder of Superseding Cause Fails.
As stated earlier, Ed pushing Bob was not a superseding cause because it was directly reacting to the burglary itself.
3. ED'SCRIMES
￼￼￼
Ed Committed Assault when he "Chased Bob Onto a Balcony."
Assault is the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of imminent bodily harm. A reasonable person in Bob's place would have been in such apprehension, and Ed did so intentionally; Bob's apprehension would not have occurred but for Ed's act, and the result was not too remote or accidental to hold Ed liable, so both actual and proximate causation are met.
Ed Committed Battery when He Pushed Bob, Which Merges with Homicide.
Battery is the intentional touching of a person without consent, causing injury or offense to a reasonable person.
Ed pushed Bob intentionally, touching him in a way offensive to a reasonable person without consent, so he is guilty of battery. But the push led to Bob falling
off the balcony, then falling on Diane, so if Ed is guilty of Diane's homicide, the battery is transferred from Bob to Diane and merges with the homicide.
Ed Committed Homicide When He Pushed Bob Over the Railing -- Either Involuntary Manslaughter, Second-Degree Murder, or First-Degree Murder.
Homicide is the act or omission resulting in the death of another human. Involuntary manslaughter is to do so recklessly or grossly negligently; voluntary manslaughter is to do so with intent to kill but adequately provoked by the victim, second-degree murder is to do so with malice aforethought either through reckless disregard for extreme risk to human life or intent to kill (either express or implied), and first-degree murder is to do so with premeditation and deliberation or during the commission of a felony before the defendant has reached safe haven. Actual and proximate causation must be met.
Here, Ed acted with reckless disregard for extreme risk to human life when he pushed Bob over the railing if that was a substantially certain result of his act, and would therefore be guilty of depraved heart murder, even if he did not intend to kill.
￼￼￼
Ed's Intent Toward Bob Transfers to Diane.
Ed intended to push Bob, not Diane, but if he did so with such mens rea as necessary for murder, he is guilty of murdering Diane through transferred intent.
ED'S DEFENSES
Ed's Defense of Property Defense Fails.
Ed's Provocation Defense Fails.
Murder can be mitigated to voluntary manslaughter for adequate provocation where not mere words are used, but that fails here because Bob was merely in his office.
Ed's Lack of Intent to Kill Defense May Fail, If He Acted with Reckless Disregard for Extreme Risk to Human Life.
Ed's Lack of Premeditation and Deliberation Defense May Fail.

QUESTION 2 – SELECTED ANSWER B
1. Statev.Alma
SOLICITATION
Solicitation is the act of asking or encouraging another person to commit a criminal act with the intent that the person commits the act. The crime is completed as soon as the asking has occurred.
Here, when Alma asked Bob to "open a locked drawer in Ed's desk so that she could obtain confidential documents for use in embarrassing Ed," that is sufficient to hold Alma criminally liable for the act of solicitation.
Alma will not be able to raise any defenses for this crime. Alma will be guilty of solicitation.
CONSPIRACY
Conspiracy is an agreement between two or more parties to commit a crime with the intent to agree and the intent to complete the objectives of the crime. The defendants are liable for the committed crimes as well as all foreseeable crimes committed by other co-defendants. Some jurisdictions require an overt act. It does not merge with the resulting crime.
Here, after Alma asked Bob to help her break into Ed's office, Bob said "he would help her." That is sufficient to constitute an agreement.
Next, both Alma and Bob went to Ed's office, where Ed "opened the locked desk drawer." This is sufficient to demonstrate an overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy.
Alma will be guilty of conspiracy.
￼
CONSPIRACY - PINKERTON LIABILITY
Pinkerton liability exists to hold each co-conspirator liable for crimes committed by other co-conspirators, as long as they are foreseeable and in furtherance of the conspiracy.
Here, because Bob committed additional crimes (discussed infra), the prosecution will argue that Alma should be liable. Those crimes are foreseeable and in furtherance of the conspiracy; therefore, Alma will be convicted of those crimes as well.
ACCOMPLICE LIABILITY
Accomplice liability includes four different categories: principal in the first degree, principal in the second degree, accessory before the fact, and accessory after the fact. A principal in the first degree is one who is present at the scene and commits at least one element of the crime. A principal in the second degree is one who is present at the scene, but does not commit any elements of the crime. An accomplice is liable for all foreseeable crimes.
Here, Alma will be considered a principal in the first degree since she actually "removed the confidential documents from the drawer." Similar to the liability discussed under Pinkerton (discussed supra), she will be held liable for all foreseeable crimes committed by Bob.
LARCENY
Larceny is the asportation or taking away of another person's property by trespass or trick with the intent to permanently deprive.
Here, the prosecution will argue that after Alma broke into Ed's office with Bob and "removed the confidential documents from the drawer," that constitutes larceny.
Alma, on the other hand, will argue that there was no taking away or asportation, since they were both caught in the act by Ed. The facts do not state whether Alma escaped with the documents, so additional facts will be needed to establish this detail.

The prosecution will then argue that even in the absence of Alma physically departing with the documents, asportation does not require an extensive distance from the location where the property was removed from. Even running to the exterior of Ed's office into the hallway will suffice. Also, Alma possesses the mens rea of permanently depriving Ed of the documents, since she was hoping to use them "in embarrassing Ed into paying her what she thought he owed her." The prosecution will prevail under these arguments.
Alma will be guilty of larceny.
BURGLARY
Under common law, burglary is the breaking and entering into the dwelling of another at night with the intent to commit a felony within.
Here, the prosecution will point to the facts that Alma broke into Ed's office to steal.
Alma will argue that the elements of dwelling and night are not met, since the facts do not state when the crime occurred and Ed's office is not a dwelling.
Modernly, burglary is the breaking and entering into the a building with the intent to commit a felony within.
Based on this definition, although the facts do not specifically state that Alma and Bob broke into Ed's office (it is implied that they entered the office since they were able to open the locked desk drawer from within), breaking and entering will be sufficient even if the defendant pushes the door open; therefore, it can be reasonably inferred that a breaking and entering occurred. Moreover, Alma had the intent to commit a larceny (discussed supra). The prosecution will be successful in establishing burglary.
Alma will be guilty of burglary. MERGER

The merger doctrine provides that lesser included crimes will be merged into more serious crimes if the more serious crimes include the elements of the lesser included crimes.
Here, because burglary includes the elements of larceny, Alma cannot be convicted of both. She will be convicted of the more serious crime of burglary.
ATTEMPT
An attempt is the dangerous proximity of completing the object crime.
Here, the prosecution will charge Alma with attempted extortion, since she was trying to obtain "confidential documents for use in embarrassing Ed into paying her." Since she was caught by Ed while she was in Ed's office, she likely was unable to extort Ed. However, because she possessed the documents, it should suffice for the element of being in dangerous proximity of completing the crime.
Alma will be guilty of attempted extortion.
DEFENSES
a) Necessity
Necessity is the choice between two evils. It applies when faced with a natural force.
Here, Alma may argue that her livelihood depended on receiving the money that Ed owes her (if that is to be the case, which is not specified in the facts). However, a private monetary dispute is not a natural force (such as a hurricane, earthquake, etc.).
Moreover, the prosecution will argue that the law provides civil remedy for employment disputes, including overtime pay. Alma could have sued Ed in civil courts under the Fair Labor Standards Act or other applicable statutes.

Alma will fail to raise this defense.
2. Statev.Bob
CONSPIRACY Defined supra.
Here, because Bob told Alma that "he would help her," they both went to Ed's office, and Bob actually opened the locked desk drawer; all of these will suffice to establish that there was an agreement between Bob and Alma, that they both intended to agree and to complete the object crime, and there was an overt act.
Bob will be guilty of conspiracy.
CONSPIRACY -- PINKERTON LIABILITY Defined supra.
Bob will be guilty of all foreseeable crimes committed by Alma in furtherance of the conspiracy (discussed supra).
ACCOMPLICE LIABILITY
Defined supra.
Here, Bob will be considered a principal in the first degree, since the facts state that he "opened the locked desk drawer" and "removed the confidential documents in the drawer." He will be held liable for all foreseeable crimes committed by Alma.
LARCENY
Defined and discussed supra.
Bob will be guilty of larceny. BURGLARY
￼
Defined and discussed supra. Bob will be guilty of burglary.
MERGER
The merger doctrine provides that lesser included crimes will be merged into more serious crimes if the more serious crimes include the elements of the lesser included crimes.
Here, because burglary includes the elements of larceny, Alma cannot be convicted of both. She will be convicted of the more serious crime of burglary.
BATTERY
Battery is the harmful and offensive touching of another without consent.
Here, the facts state that Bob "landed on Diane," which is a harmful and offensive touching. Furthermore, Diane "died instantly," which demonstrates harm.
Bob will argue that he was actually pushed by Ed, which caused him to fall "over the balcony railing" and eventually land on Diane. Therefore, he lacks the requisite intent to touch Diane. Bob will be successful under these arguments.
Bob will not be guilty of battery.
HOMICIDE / MURDER
Murder is the unlawful killing of another with malice aforethought. Malice can be express or implied, which is demonstrated through the intent to kill, intent to cause serious bodily injury, reckless disregard for human life (depraved heart), or intent to commit a felony.
Here, a death occurred because Diane died. a) First-Degree Murder

First-degree murder is killing with premeditation and deliberation. It can be shown through a cool and dispassionate killing or pre-design to kill. First-degree murder can also be during the commission of a felony (discussed infra).
b) FelonyMurderRule
The felony murder rule provides that killing that occurred during the commission of a felony will suffice for conviction of first-degree murder. Courts have placed restrictions to require that the felony must be inherently dangerous and separate from the act that caused the death. Causation is also a factor.
The prosecution will argue that because Diane died in the commission of the felony (of burglary), Bob should be convicted for the murder of Diane under first-degree murder. Burglary is a dangerous felony, which will suffice for the purpose of convicting Bob.
Ed, on the other hand, will argue that Diane's death lacks causation. Causation includes but-for and proximate cause.
But-for cause is the actual cause. Here, but-for Bob's running away, he would not have landed onto Diane. The but-for cause is present.
Proximate cause is the legal cause. Legal cause pertains to the foreseeability of the defendant's act. Bob will argue that there is an intervening cause when he was pushed by Ed. Ed's pushing was the superseding cause which breaks the causal connection. Bob will likely prevail under this argument in establishing that proximate cause is not present.
Bob will not be guilty of first-degree murder.
c) Second-DegreeMurder
All other types of murder are second-degree murder.

Assuming that Bob will not be found guilty of first-degree murder, the prosecution will charge Bob with second-degree murder.
d) VoluntaryManslaughter
Voluntary manslaughter is killing committed under the heat of passion. Passion is provoked by an adequate provocation that is sudden and intense, the defendant does not have an opportunity to cool off, and indeed did not cool off.
There is no evidence to suggest that there was any provocation between Bob and Diane.
Bob's murder will not be reduced to voluntary manslaughter. e) InvoluntaryManslaughter
Involuntary manslaughter is killing committed due to reckless disregard of a justifiable risk to human life.
Here, Bob will argue that his charges should be reduced to involuntary manslaughter because he lacks the requisite intent to kill Diane. Rather, it was due to him running away from his crime.
The prosecution will then argue that albeit he was pushed by Ed, it is foreseeable that body touching will occur in runaway situations, and Bob should nonetheless be liable for the murder of Diane.
Bob will be guilty of involuntary manslaughter.
DEFENSES Withdrawal
A co-conspirator can withdraw by announcing his withdrawal to other co-conspirators prior to the commitment of the crime in time for them to abandon their plans. The

defendant will be relieved of future liability for crimes committed beyond that point, but will still be guilty of crimes already committed as well as the crime of conspiracy.
Bob will argue that when he ran away after being caught by Ed, he withdrew from the conspiracy.
However, there is no evidence to suggest that Bob actually announced his withdrawal by notifying Diane.
Therefore, this defense will not apply. 3. Statev.Ed
BATTERY Defined supra.
The prosecution will be able to establish that there is a harmful or offensive touching to Bob. Although Bob was "unharmed," the pushing by Ed is nonetheless offensive.
Ed will raise the following defenses:
a) Self-Defense
Self-defense is a defense as long as reasonable force is used to protect against an imminent attack.
Here, there is no evidence to suggest that Ed was under any imminent attack by Bob or Alma.
This defense will fail. b) Defense of Property
￼
A defendant may use reasonable force to defend against property. Deadly force is not reasonable.
Here, Ed will argue that he was defending the confidential documents that were being removed from his office.
However, the prosecution will argue that because Ed was chasing Bob, which led to the pushing, that exceeds the scope of defense of property.
This defense will fail. c) Citizen'sArrest
A citizen can use reasonable force to arrest another if he witnesses the commission of a crime.
Here, Ed will argue that because he saw Bob removing documents from his office, it was a crime and he was arresting Bob.
However, there is nothing from the facts that indicate that Ed was indeed attempting to arrest Bob when he chased him, such as by yelling "I'm arresting you" or something to that effect.
This defense will fail.
MURDER
Defined supra. Ed will be charged for the killing of Diane.
a) First-Degree Murder Defined supra.
There is no evidence to suggest that Ed premeditated or deliberated.

Ed will not be guilty of first-degree murder. b) Second-Degree Murder
Defined supra.
Ed will be charged with second-degree murder. c) VoluntaryManslaughter
Defined supra.
There is no evidence to suggest provocation.
Ed's charges will not be reduced to voluntary manslaughter. d) InvoluntaryManslaughter
Defined supra.
Here, Ed will argue that his charges should be reduced to involuntary manslaughter because he risked human life when he was reckless in pushing Bob off a balcony. It is foreseeable that pushing large objects (such as a human -- Bob) will result in people getting injured or killed.
Ed will prevail under these arguments.
Ed will be guilty of involuntary manslaughter of Diane.
Defenses
None for the murder.


_____________________________________________________________________________




_____________________________________________________________________________




_____________________________________________________________________________




_____________________________________________________________________________
