1. Tell me about failure

I implemented the job website with mysql database and then it was having million records, and then search breaks, so that was my failure,
i fixed it by using solr search engine

I was making a project to fetch the data from yahoo website, but yahoo blocks the ip after few request
and i fixed it by implementing the ip switcher.


How to answer the job interview question 'Give me an example of a time you did something wrong'
Never say never
	You say: In my position three years ago at Company X, I missed a major deadline, which is why I'm extremely vigilant on keeping my calendar and to do list up to date every day. 
	
Don't blame others
You say: I missed the deadline because I didn't maintain proper communication with my team members.


Tell them you handled it like a champ
You say: As soon as I realized I was going to miss the deadline, I contacted all the stakeholders in the project to smooth things over, and we all put in the extra hours needed to get it completed quickly.


Talk about lessons learned
You say: After I missed that deadline, I created a spreadsheet for all future projects that showed everyone a project snapshot and clearly indicated deadlines and where we're at in the process at any given time. Since then, I've never missed a deadline.



2. Tell me about situation where you didn't owned something but you didn't like it, what did you do



3. Tell me about how did you solved some problem from customer backwards perspective
4. Tell me about the time where you created something new or simplified existing system and how did you go about finding things that existed rather than reinventing
5. Tell me about the time when you didn't had enough data and you had to make a decision. HOw did you do it
6. Tell me about the time when you raised the bar or standards for your team
7. Tell me about the time when you took a calculated risk
8. Tell me about the time when you demonstrated frugality (show how to do more in less) or managed the case with insufficient resources
9. tell me about the time when you earned trust of your team or peers or cross group
10. Tell me about the time when data didn't agreed with annecdotal evidence - what did you do?
11. tell me about the time when you disagreed with someone - how did you resolved issue?
12. tell me about the time when you received critical feedback on your work - how did you handled it
13. tell me about the time when you missed a deadline or a deliverable - how did you handled it
14. tell me about the time when you disagreed with your lead or manager - how did you handled it