All Definitions



CONTRACTS LAW

The rights and remedies of the parties depend on whether or not there was a valid contract. A contract is a promise or set of promises the performance of which the law will recognize as a duty and for which the law will provide a remedy.

A. FORMATION OF CONTRACTS





Definition 1. Does UCC apply?

UCC Article 2 governs contracts for the sale of GOODS, movable things at the time of
identification to the contract. Otherwise, only COMMON LAW governs the contract.

Sample 1, page 74.

1) UCC?

UCC Article 2 governs contracts for the sale of GOODS, movable things at the time of
identification to the contract. Otherwise, only COMMON LAW governs the contract.
Here the contract does not concern a sale of movable things because it is for the "rent" of a "house".
Therefore, only COMMON LAW principles govern this contract.

Sample 2, page 75

1) UCC?
Article 2 of the UCC governs contracts for the sale of GOODS, movable things at the time of identification to the contract.
Here the contract is for sale of a moveable thing because it was for sale of a “tuxedo”. Therefore this was a contract for a sale of goods and the UCC governs.

Sample 3, page 80
1) UCC?
UCC Article 2 governs contracts for the sale of GOODS, movable things at the time of
identification to the contract.
Here the question involves a sale of a "car" and it is movable because it was to be delivered.
Therefore, the UCC applies here.

Sample 4, page 84

TOM v. AL
1. Was the contract of January 1 unenforceable by Tom because it was oral?

1) UCC?
UCC Article 2 governs the sale of goods, moveable things at the time of identification to the contract. But UCC Article 1 generally requires a written contract signed by the party to be bound for any sale of personal property that is not goods in excess of $5,000.

Here Tom claimed the records were “goods” but the contract was not for the sale of anything movable because it was for the sale of “recording rights”. But it was for a sale of personal property because it was for “exclusive recording rights.” The value of the contract was not stated to be over $5,000, and it might be argued that on that basis Article I would not require a writing at the time of execution, even though the song later became popular.

Therefore UCC Article 2 would not require this contract to be in writing, and it is arguable that Article 1 would not require a writing because the contract was not clearly in excess of $5,000 at the time of execution.


Sample 5, page 88
1) UCC?
Article 2 of the UCC governs contracts for the sale of GOODS. GOODS are movable things at the time of identification to the contract. Otherwise only the common law applies.
Here the contract does not involve a sale because it is a contract for personal services -- building a house.
Therefore, only the COMMON LAW applies.


Sample 6, page 91
1. What are Dottie's remedies at law relative to the stock? 1) UCC?
UCC Article 2 governs contracts for the sale of GOODS. GOODS are movable things at the time of identification to the contract. Otherwise only the common law applies.
Here the contract is not for a sale of goods because it is an exchange of promises that Dottie will provide services and Fester will leave her his stock in his Will in exchange.
Therefore, only the COMMON LAW governs.

Sample 7, page 95

1) Does the UCC apply?
UCC Article 2 governs contracts for the sale of GOODS. GOODS are movable things at the time of identification to the contract.
Here the question involves a sale of "widgets" and they are clearly moveable because they were to be “delivered”.
Therefore, Article 2 of UCC applies.




Definition 2. Are the parties MERCHANTS?
Under the UCC a MERCHANT is a person who trades in or otherwise holds himself out by occupation or otherwise as knowledgeable about the goods of the contract.

Sample 2, page 77
2) MERCHANTS?
Under the UCC MERCHANTS are people who deal in the goods or hold themselves out by occupation as knowledgeable about the goods in a contract.
Here Bob deals in tuxedos because he has a clothing store. Al may have "bought a lot of clothes " but there is no evidence he deals in tuxedos or hold himself out by occupation as being particularly knowledgeable about them.
Therefore Bob is a merchant and Al is not.


Sample 7, page 95
2) Are the parties MERCHANTS?
Under the UCC MERCHANTS are people who deal in the goods or hold themselves out by occupation as knowledgeable about the goods in a contract.
Here Sellco is clearly a dealer in these types of goods because it advertises them in its “catalogue.” Buyco is by occupation knowledgeable concerning “widgets” because of the large quantities it is ordering ($60,000).
Therefore, the parties appear to be merchants.




Definition 3. Was the communication of [date] an OFFER?
Under contract law an OFFER is a manifestation of present contractual intent communicated to the offeree such that an objective person would reasonably believe assent would form a bargain. 

If ONLY common law go on to say,
At common law a communication was only deemed sufficient to constitute an offer if it specified the parties, subject matter, quantity, price, and time of performance.


If UCC say,
The UCC deems a communication sufficient to constitute an offer if it specifies the parties and quantity. The UCC provides “GAP FILLERS” that may be used by the Court to determine any additional terms.

Sample 1, page 74
3) Was the ADVERTISEMENT an OFFER?
Under contract law an OFFER is a manifestation of present intent to enter into a bargain communicated to the offeree and sufficiently specific that an observer would reasonably believe assent would form a bargain. Advertisements are generally not offers because they usually fail to identify the parties or the quantity being offered.
Here the advertisement was not specific as to the parties because it did not guarantee that Lucy would rent to the first person to respond.
Therefore, the advertisement was not an offer.

Sample 1, page 75
4) Was the 9:00 statement by Homer an OFFER? Offer is defined above.
Here the statement by Homer did not appear to manifest intent to enter into a bargain because even though he said, "I accept" he added that he "had to see the house first." No reasonable person would believe assent to that statement would form a bargain because it was clear he wanted to “see the house first.”
Therefore the statement was not an offer.

5) Was the 9:00 response by Lucy an OFFER? Offer is defined above.
Here the statement by Lucy did manifest intent to enter into a bargain because she said "It's a deal. I will rent to you for $550." A reasonable person would believe assent to that statement would form a bargain.
Therefore that statement was an offer.

Sample 2, page 77
4) Did Bob OFFER to sell the tuxedo?
Under contract law an OFFER is a manifestation of present contractual intent communicated to the offeree that is so specific that an objective observer would reasonably believe assent would form a bargain.
Here Bob manifested an intent to sell a tuxedo because he "suggested Al buy" the tuxedo. And a reasonable person would believe assent to this communication would form a bargain.
Therefore, Bob made an offer.

Sample 7, page 96

4) Was the catalogue an OFFER?
Under contract law an OFFER is a manifestation of present contractual intent communicated to the offeree that is so specific that an objective observer would reasonably believe assent would form a bargain. An advertisement is never a valid offer unless it clearly identifies the QUANTITY of goods for sale and the PARTY to whom the offeror is willing to sell them.
Here the catalogue is not an offer because it is just a price list that does not specify the quantity of any product Sellco is willing to sell. No reasonable person would believe merely ‘assenting’ to the catalogue would alone form a bargain, so a catalogue cannot be an ‘offer’..
Therefore, the catalogue itself is not an offer.

5) 6/2/99 OFFER by Buyco?
Offer is defined above.
Here the communication from Buyco expresses present contractual intent because it says “we hereby accept”. The offer is specific as to parties because it says “we” and “your”, and it is specific as to a quantity of “10,000”. This is specific enough for an offer because it objectively appears assent would form a bargain.
Therefore, this is a valid offer.



Definition 4. Was the offer a MERCHANT’S FIRM OFFER?
Under UCC 2-205 an offer by a merchant that promises to “leave the offer open” for a period of time cannot be revoked by the offeror if it is stated in writing, for the period of time stated, or for a reasonable period of time (given the circumstances) if no time period is stated. However, regardless of the period of time stated by the offeror, the offeror can revoke within 3 months if that is less than the time period stated.
If the merchant promises to “leave the offer open” for any period of time, whether more or less than 3 months, that is the “reasonable period of time” in which the offeree can accept the offer even if the offeror could legally revoke the offer sooner.

Sample 1, page 75

6) Did Homer have a valid OPTION?
Offer is defined above. Under common law an OPTION is a contractual agreement that an offeror will not revoke an offer for a specific period of time in exchange for CONSIDERATION from the offeree. CONSIDERATION is an exchange of promises posing legal detriment such that the law deems it sufficient to support an agreement.
Here Lucy promised to give a "firm offer", but Homer gave no promise or value in exchange. While the UCC provides for “firm offers” from merchants, the UCC does not govern here. Therefore, Lucy received no legal consideration in exchange for her promise to give a “firm offer” and her promise cannot be enforced against her as an option contract.
Therefore, Lucy's offer did not create an option contract, and she could revoke her offer at any time.




Definition 5. Was it an offer for a UNILATERAL CONTRACT?
Under the common law a UNILATERAL CONTRACT OFFER is one that unequivocally indicates acceptance can only be manifested by completion of performance by the offeree. GENERAL OFFERS, reward or bounty offers, are always unilateral contract offers.

Sample 6, page 91
3) UNILATERAL CONTRACT?
Under contract law a UNILATERAL CONTRACT is proposed by an offer that unequivocally requires acceptance by performance and cannot be accepted merely by a promise of performance.

Here this offer unequivocally required Dottie to "actually take care of " Fester for the rest of his life because Fester “emphasized” Dottie could not accept by merely “promising” to do what he asked.
Therefore, this was an offer of a unilateral contract.

4) SAVING DOCTRINES of a UNILATERAL CONTRACT?
Under the common law an offeror could revoke her offer at any time before acceptance. Under that view Fester could revoke at any time, leaving Dottie without a remedy. Modernly SAVING DOCTRINES have been adopted to prohibit the offeror of a unilateral contract from revoking for a reasonable time after becoming aware that the offeree has begun performance in acceptance.

Under an alternative view the offeror may revoke but the offeree has a right to RESTITUTION to avoid UNJUST ENRICHMENT.

Here Dottie began performance in acceptance because she "sold her home", "moved" and "nursed Fester." And Fester was aware of her performance because he was alert despite his paralysis.

Therefore, under the modern savings doctrines Dottie would usually be given a reasonable time to complete performance. Here a "reasonable time" is the rest of Fester's life, since that was the condition of the offer.



Definition 6. Was the communication (action) of [date] an (implied) ACCEPTANCE?
If ONLY common law, say,
Under the common law MIRROR IMAGE RULE an acceptance is an unequivocal assent to an offer.

If UCC say,
Under UCC 2-206 an acceptance of an offer not otherwise expressly conditioned may be made in any REASONABLE MANNER, including a promise to ship or shipment of either conforming or non-conforming goods. BUT a shipment of NON-CONFORMING goods as an EXPRESS ACCOMMODATION is not an acceptance. Further, UCC 2-207 allows an acceptance containing varying terms to be effective. 

Sample 1, Page 75

7) Did Homer effectively ACCEPT at 3:00?
At common law an acceptance must be an unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer, dispatched to the offeror in the manner required, or if no manner is required in the offer, by the means by which the offer was dispatched or some faster means.. An offer must be accepted before it LAPSES. Unless there is an option, an offer lapses in the time stated or if no time is stated within a reasonable time after the offer is made.

Here the reasonable time for acceptance of Lucy's offer is defined by the understanding that Homer would view the house in only one hour at "10:00". That understanding established the “reasonable time” within which Homer could accept the offer. But Homer was "five hours late," so Lucy's offer had already lapsed when he arrived. Homer's attempt to unequivocally accept Lucy's 9:00 offer by saying "I unequivocally accept" was ineffective because he could not accept an offer that had already lapsed.
Therefore, Homer's attempt to accept was ineffective.

Sample 2, page 77
5) Did Al ACCEPT Bob's offer?
Under the UCC acceptance of an offer can be made by any reasonable means showing assent to an offer.
Here Al showed assent by a reasonable means because he " agreed". Therefore, Al accepted Bob's offer.


Sample 7, page 96

6) 6/3/99 ACCEPTANCE?
Under UCC 2-206 an offer that does not clearly require acceptance in a specific manner can be accepted in any reasonable manner including a promise to ship or shipment of conforming or non- conforming goods.
Under UCC 2-207 an acceptance that includes varying terms is still effective. If the contract is between merchants the varying term proposed by the offeree may become part of the contract if the offer did not expressly require acceptance according to its terms, the offeror does not object to the varying terms within a reasonable time, and the varying terms are not a material alteration of the offer terms.
Even when varying terms do not automatically become part of the contract they may become part of the contract by agreement, and the UCC allows modification without additional consideration.
Here Sellco did not promise to ship in response to Buyco’s offer because it said it "could provide" and not that it “would” provide the product. The word “could” does not imply any “promise to ship”. Therefore the response of Sellco was a rejection of Buyco’s offer and and a counter-offer to sell on different terms.

Buyco’s reaction to Sellco’s offer to sell without warranty was an acceptance because Buyco “verbally agreed.”
Even if one argues that Sellco accepted Buyco’s offer with a varying term, Buyco still “agreed” to it, so that would have modified the contract to exclude the warranty term anyway.
Therefore, there was an acceptance under either interpretation, and there is “no warranty” under either interpretation.

Definition 7. Did the VARYING TERMS become part of the contract?
Under UCC 2-207 an acceptance that includes varying terms is still effective. If the contract is between merchants the varying term proposed by the offeree may become part of the contract if the offer did not expressly require acceptance according to its terms, the offeror does not object to the varying terms within a reasonable time, and the varying terms are not a material alteration of the offer term.

Definition 8. Had the OFFER LAPSED before acceptance was attempted?
Under common law an offer LAPSES AND CANNOT BE ACCEPTED unless it is accepted in a reasonable period of time. Oral offers are deemed to lapse at the end of the conversation, and written offers are deemed to lapse within the timeframe implied by the means of dispatch, absent contrary agreement or implication.



Definition 9. Was the communication of [date] an EFFECTIVE ACCEPTANCE?
Under the MAILBOX RULES of the common law an acceptance is effective when dispatched, if dispatched in the manner specified in the offer, or by the same or faster means the offer was transmitted where the offer does not specify a means of communication.


Definition 10. Was the communication of [date] an EFFECTIVE REJECTION?

Under the MAILBOX RULES of contract law a rejection is effective upon receipt while an acceptance may be effective upon dispatch. An EXCEPTION is made if the OFFEROR CHANGES POSITION in reliance upon a communication of rejection, not knowing that an acceptance was dispatched prior to receipt of the rejection. In that case the rejection is effective upon receipt regardless of the fact an acceptance was also dispatched.

Definition 11. Was the communication of [date] an EFFECTIVE REVOCATION?
Under the MAILBOX RULES revocation of a contract offer is usually effective upon receipt.

Under common law a unilateral offer could be revoked at any time, and revocation of GENERAL OFFERS, reward or bounty offers, was effective when published in the same manner the offer was first announced. But modernly SAVING DOCTRINES prevent the revocation of a unilateral contract offer if the offeror is aware the offeree has commenced the requested act for a reasonable period during which the offeree will be allowed to complete acceptance by performance.


Definition 12. Was there an IMPLIED-IN-FACT CONTRACT?
Under contract law an IMPLIED-IN-FACT CONTRACT will be deemed to have existed, even if there is no express agreement between the parties, if one party acts to bestow benefits on the other party reasonably expecting to be compensated, and the other party knowingly accepts those benefits knowing that the other party expects to be compensated.

Definition 13. Is a WRITING needed?

If ONLY common law governs say, 
Under the STATUTE OF FRAUDS certain types of contracts must be written in order to be legally enforced, and one type is a contract for (pick one if it applies here -- MARRIAGE, more than a YEAR, LAND, EXECUTOR of an estate, GUARANTEE of a debt).


If UCC say,

Under UCC 2-201, a contract for sale of goods worth $500 or more must evidenced by a writing sufficient to show the existence of a contract and signed by the party against whom the contract is to be enforced. But between merchants a SALES CONFIRMATION by one listing quantity will bind both parties if the receiving party does not object within 10 days.

Furthermore, the UCC provides exceptions for SPECIAL MADE GOODS, where there is an ADMISSION by the party to be bound that there had been an agreement, or where there has been PARTIAL PERFORMANCE of the contract (i.e. acceptance of some or all goods or payment).

Under UCC 2-209 contract modifications must be written to be legally enforceable if the contract, as modified, is for over $500. Otherwise modification agreements will be treated as waivers of conditions that can be always be retracted, unless the Court estops retraction to prevent injustice.


Sample 1, page 74
2) Is a WRITING REQUIRED?

Under the STATUTE OF FRAUDS certain types of contracts must be in writing to be enforced. A contract for conveyance of an interest in LAND often requires a writing, but not leaseholds of a year or less.
Here the question involves conveyance of an interest in land because the alleged agreement was to rent a "house", but this appears to be a month-to-month rental.
Therefore, a writing would not generally be required.

Sample 2, page 77
3) Is A WRITING NEEDED?
Under UCC 2-201 a contract for the sale of GOODS over $500 requires a writing. This limit is being raised to $5,000 but many States are still using the $500 limit. Under the UCC a contract between MERCHANTS may satisfy the need for a writing against both parties if there is a sales confirmation indicating the quantity sent to one party by the other and the receiving party does not object to the representation of a contract.
Further, under the UCC there is no need for a writing if goods are custom made, the person to be bound acknowledges the contract in a legal setting or where a party has accepted payment or goods.
Here the goods are over $500 because the tuxedo costs "$519.95." And Al is not a merchant as shown above.
Further, this was a "ready-made" tuxedo, not custom made, and Al never acknowledged the contract in a legal setting or accepted the goods.

Therefore a writing signed by Al is needed if the contract is to be enforced against him by Bob.


Sample 2, page 79

8) Can Al raise the LACK OF WRITING as a defense?
As discussed above, Bob could not enforce the contract unless he had a signed writing from Al. No facts show that Al ever signed any writing to buy the tuxedo.
Therefore, Bob cannot force Al to pay for the tuxedo.


Sample 4, page 84

2) Statute of Frauds?
Under the STATUTE OF FRAUDS a contract that necessarily takes more than a year to complete from the time of formation must be in writing to be enforceable at law. But if an oral agreement that fails to satisfy the statute is partially or fully performed, it may be enforceable at equity to the extent necessary to prevent injustice. To plead equity one must have “clean hands”.
Here the contract would necessarily take more than a year because it was entered "two days before" Al was 17 and it was to last until he was "18". That is more than a year.
Therefore, the Statute of Frauds required a writing even if Article 1 of the UCC did not. Al only agreed to the contract orally, so and the contract was not enforceable against him at law because it was oral.
Further, Tom would be unable to plead “clean hands” because he appears to have taken advantage of Al, a minor, and to have lied to Deccra about Al’s age.
Therefore Tom would be unable to enforce the oral agreement against Al at either law or equity.

2. Was the contract of January 1 enforceable against Tom by Al?

3) STATUTE OF FRAUDS?

The Statute of Frauds is defined above.
Here Tom sent Al a “signed” confirmation that “gave all the details”. And Al also has “performed completely”.

Therefore there may be sufficient “writing” signed by Tom that the Statue of Frauds might be satisfied.
Otherwise Al would probably be able to enforce the contract against Tom at equity to the extent necessary to avoid injustice.

Sample 5, page 88
2) Is a WRITING REQUIRED?
Under the STATUTE OF FRAUDS certain types of contracts must be in writing to be enforced. A contract for conveyance of an interest in LAND generally requires a writing, and contracts that necessarily must take more than a year to complete require a writing.
Here the contract is for building a house, and does not involve conveyance of an interest in land because Homer “already owns” the land. And the contract can be performed in less than a year because it was to be completed before the “Winter rains”.
Therefore, no writing is required by the Statute of Frauds

Sample 6, page 91
2) Is a WRITING REQUIRED?
Under the STATUTE OF FRAUDS certain types of contracts must be in writing to be enforced. A contract for transfer of stock is not one of them.
Therefore, no writing is required by the Statute of Frauds.

Sample 6, page 92
2. What are Dottie's remedies at law relative to the house?
The same common law and savings doctrines apply to the house as for the stock as explained above. But under the STATUTE OF FRAUDS contracts for interests in land must be in writing to be enforced at law.
7) STATUTE OF FRAUDS?
The Statute of Frauds is defined above.
Here the contract was for conveyance of an interest in land because the contract was for a ”house" to be given to Dottie in exchange for services.

Therefore, the Statute of Frauds would require a writing, and this contract generally cannot be enforced at law regarding the house.


Sample 7, page 95
3) Is there a NEED FOR A WRITING?
Under UCC 2-201 a contract for the sale of GOODS over $500 requires a writing signed by the party to be bound unless an exception applies. This limit is being raised to $5,000 but many States are continuing to use the $500 limit.
In a contract between MERCHANTS the need for a writing may be satisfied by a sales confirmation indicating the quantity sent to one party by the other if the receiving party has reason to know the contents of the writing and does not object to the representation of a contract within 10 days.
Here a writing is needed because the cost of the goods is $60,000 ("10,000" at "$6"). But this is “between merchants” because both parties appear to be merchants, and the 6/4 sales confirmation Sellco sent to Buyco specifies quantity at “10,000”. That satisfies the requirement of 2-201.
Therefore a writing was needed, but the need for a writing would be satisfied by the 6/4 message, unless Buyco objected within 10 days.





Chapter CONTRACT TERMS

Definition 14. What were the CONTRACT TERMS?

If an acceptance forms a contract, for common law say,
Under common law enforceable contracts generally must indicate PARTIES, PRICE, SUBJECT MATTER, TIME OF PERFORMANCE and QUANTITY. Most express terms and promises are considered to be EXPRESS MATERIAL CONDITIONS, except for TIME of performance, buyer SATISFACTION, and promises NOT TO ASSIGN the contract which are generally considered mere “covenants”.

If an acceptance forms a contract, for UCC say,
Under the UCC a contract is enforceable if the QUANTITY and PARTIES are specified. Other terms will be provided by the GAP FILLER provisions of the UCC. All express terms and promises are treated as material terms under the PERFECT TENDER RULE.


Sample 2, page 78

6) What were the TERMS of the bargain?
Under the UCC the subject matter, quantity and parties must be specified for a contract to be sufficiently certain, but all other terms can be supplied by the UCC’s GAP FILLERS.
Here the parties are Al and Bob and the subject matter is one tuxedo that is to be "exactly Al's size." Although price was not agreed upon that term would be inferred by the normal price for such goods. If $519.95 was the normal price of the tuxedo, it would be the price supplied by the UCC. The place of delivery was Bob's store and the time of delivery was agreed to be "later in the week."
Therefore the TERMS of the contract were sufficiently certain for it to be enforced.




Sample 7, page 96

7) TERMS?
Under UCC Article 2 a goods contract is enforceable if quantity and parties are specified.. All other terms can be supplied by the UCC’s GAP FILLERS.
Here the parties are specified as Sellco and Buyco. The quantity is 10,000 yellow widgets at a price of $6 without a warranty for delivery on 6/8.
Therefore the contract is specific enough to be enforced.




Definition 15. Was TIMELY PERFORMANCE a MATERIAL CONDITION?
Under contract law the parties may agree at the time of contract execution that timely performance (by the party to first perform contract services) is a MATERIAL CONDITION. Then the condition is called an EXPRESS CONDITION, and typically the contract says, “Time is of the essence”.

But material conditions may also be or implied when the parties knew at the time of execution that tardy performance would deny the non-performing party the BENEFIT OF THE BARGAIN, the benefit expected when they entered into the agreement. In that case the condition is called an IMPLIED MATERIAL CONDITION.


Definition 16. Was Buyer SATISFACTION a MATERIAL CONDITION?
Under contract law reasonably satisfactory performance by the parties is ALWAYS AN IMPLIED MATERIAL CONDITON of every contract. However, the parties may agree that buyer SATISFACTION is a MATERIAL CONDITION so buyers who are not actually satisfied have no legal duty to pay.



Definition 17. Does the PAROL EVIDENCE RULE bar evidence of other covenants and terms?

(This is only an issue if there is a detailed written contract. This and the Statute of Frauds can almost never both be issues in the same fact pattern because usually the contract can only be either written or oral, not both at the same time.)

Under the PAROL EVIDENCE RULE evidence of PRIOR or CONTEMPORANEOUS agreements may not be introduced to VARY or CONTRADICT the terms of a FULLY INTEGRATED WRITING unless it is to show evidence of [DAM FOIL] Duress, Ambiguity, Mistake, Fraud, Oral condition precedent, Illegality, or Lack of consideration. 


DEFENSES
Definition 18. Can LACK OF INTENT be raised as a defense?
Under the OBJECTIVE MAN RULE, there is sufficient INTENT to enter into a contract if an objective observer listening to the parties would have reasonably concluded from their communications that assent would form a bargain.


Definition 19. Is LACK OF CONSIDERATION a defense?
Under contract law every valid contract, and any modification of a contract, must be supported by CONSIDERATION, a BARGAINED FOR exchange posing sufficient LEGAL DETRIMENT that the law will enforce the agreement.

Sample 5, page 88

3) MODIFICATION without CONSIDERATION?
Under COMMON LAW a contract modification must be supported by CONSIDERATION, a bargained for exchange of value posing legal detriment sufficient to enforce the modification at law.
Here the contract was modified because Homer promised to pay $30,000 more. But Bill did not give anything of value in exchange for that promise since he only agreed to do what he already had a PRE-EXISTING DUTY to do -- to build the house for $100,000.
Therefore, the modification of the contract was not supported by consideration and it is unenforceable at law against Homer.




Definition 20. Was the need for a WRITING SATISFIED?
(This second visit to the Statute of Frauds is only necessary if you did not settle the issue completely at the beginning of the essay OR there has been a contract modification.)


Under UCC 2-209 contract modifications do not require consideration, but if a contract as modified would have to be supported by a sufficient writing under UCC 2-201, and the modification is not supported by a writing, it is not enforceable at law. 


Definition 21. Was the contract UNCONSCIONABLE?
Under contract law an unconscionable contract will not be enforceable because there is NO REASONABLE FINDING OF INTENT to enter into such a contract. An ADHESION CONTRACT is a “take it or leave it” contract that a party is forced to agree to, and it will often be found unenforceable.


Definition 22. Is DURESS a defense?
Under contract law only good faith agreements are enforceable. No contract agreement induced by illegal threats is valid. Likewise, agreements induced by deliberate acts to create threats of economic harm are not enforceable. 


Definition 23. Is FRAUD (or DECEIT) a defense?
Under contract law a contract induced through deliberate CONCEALMENT of material facts by a party with a duty to reveal the facts, or by a party deliberately concealing and/or MISREPRESENTING material facts is unenforceable if it can be shown the party seeking to void the contract would never have agreed to the bargain but for the concealment and/or misrepresentation. 

Sample 4, page 85
AL v. DECCRA
3. Was the contract of March 1 enforceable by Al against Deccra?
5) FRAUD?

Under contract law FRAUD is a defense to enforcement of a contract where a party 1) deliberately misrepresented material facts, 2) the party raising the defense reasonably relied on the misrepresentations, and 3) the party to be bound would not have entered into the contract but for the misrepresentation.
Here Tom deliberately misrepresented facts because he said Al was "19" knowing that Al was a minor. And this was a material fact since it represented Al had legal capacity to enter into a contract. And Decca reasonably relied on Tom's misrepresentation, and could probably prove it would not have entered the contract had it known the truth.
Therefore, the contract of March 1 was unenforceable against Deccra.




24. Is INCAPACITY a defense?
Under contract law a contract cannot be enforced AGAINST one who lacks capacity. EXCEPTIONS are contracts for provision of NECESSITIES of life.

Sample 4, page 85

4) Enforceable by a MINOR?
Under contract law a contract, except for necessities of life, cannot be enforced at law against a party which lacked legal capacity at the time of execution. But if a legal incapacity is removed the party to be bound must repudiate the contract within a reasonable period of time or they will be deemed to have affirmed or ratified it. The period of time in which a party gaining legal capacity must repudiate a contract may be set by statue.
A party lacking capacity can enforce a contract against a party that does not lack capacity.
Here Al lacked capacity at the time of execution because it was “two days before his seventeenth birthday”. But that does not prevent Al from enforcing the contract against Tom who did not lack capacity.
Therefore the contract is enforceable by Al, even though he is a minor.

Sample 4, page 86

4. ISSUE -- Was the contract of April 1 enforceable by Deccra against Al? 6) EFFECTIVE REPUDIATION OF CONTRACT?
As explained above a contract, except for necessities of life, cannot be enforced against a party lacking legal capacity at the time of execution. But if a party lacking capacity at the time of contract gains capacity, they must affirmatively repudiate the contract within a reasonable period

of time, or within the time set by statute, or they will be deemed to have affirmed or ratified the
contract.
Here Al lacked capacity to contract at the time of execution because he was a minor who was "only 17".
Al later attempted to repudiate the contract "six months after becoming an adult." He would argue that this was within a “reasonable” time after he gained capacity. And if this was within the statutory time period the repudiation was effective. Otherwise the contract may have been deemed automatically affirmed and the repudiation would be ineffective.
If the repudiation was effective, Decca would generally be required to give to Al all money it had made on the sale of his song.
Therefore, Deccra cannot enforce the contract if Al's repudiation was effective.




Definition 25. Is ILLEGALITY a defense?
Under contract law, a contract generally cannot be enforced by a party who knowingly entered into it for an illegal purpose.


Definition 26. Is IMPOSSIBILITY a defense?
Under contract law a material condition of every contract is that performance of contract duties must be objectively possible to perform. The inability of a contract party to perform is irrelevant, as long as performance, in general, is possible. But if performance becomes impossible because of events beyond the control of the parties the contract becomes void.

Sample 5, page 89
5) Defense of IMPOSSIBILITY?
Under contract law the defense of IMPOSSIBILITY excuses a breach where the performance of a contract has become impossible due to events beyond the control of the parties. Impossibility means that performance is physically impossible, and it constitutes a failure of an IMPLIED MATERIAL CONDITION of the agreement.
Here finishing the house was not impossible because Homer finished it by hiring Paul. Therefore, Wanda cannot claim impossibility as a defense.




Definition 27. Is COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY a defense?
A Court (a judge, in equity) has the authority to declare a contract void if performance by a party would be so financially burdensome, because of events beyond the control of the parties, that it would cause an injustice. 


Definition 28. Is FRUSTRATION OF PURPOSE a defense?
Under contract law, if the parties enter into a contract knowing that the failure of some condition beyond their control will deny one of the parties the benefit of the bargain, that condition is an implied material condition of the contract, the failure of which excuses both parties from the agreement .

Sample 2, page 79

9) FRUSTRATION OF PURPOSE?
Under contract law, if the parties enter into a contract knowing that the failure of some condition beyond their control will deny one of the parties the benefit of the bargain, that condition is an implied material condition of the contract, the failure of which excuses both parties from the agreement.
Here Bob knew that if the wedding of Al’s daughter was cancelled it would deny Al the benefit of the bargain because he wanted the tuxedo to “wear to the wedding.”
Therefore, Al can claim frustration of purpose excuses him from the contract.


Definition 29. Is MUTUAL MISTAKE a defense?
Under PEERLESS when both parties enter into a contract because of a misunderstanding as to a material fact, there is no “meeting of the minds” and the contract is void from the beginning.


Definition 30. Is UNILATERAL MISTAKE a defense?
Under contract law, when one party enters into a contract because of a misunderstanding as to a material fact the majority view is that the parties are legally bound to the contract unless the other party knew or should have known of the mistake, and in that case the contract is voidable by the mistaken party. Under a minority view the contract is legally voidable by the mistaken party in any event if they 1) discover the mistake quickly before the other party substantially relies on the contract, 2) give prompt notice of the mistake, and 3) reimburse the other party for any expenses caused by the mistake.


BREACH
Definition 31. Was there an ANTICIPATORY BREACH?
Under contract law an anticipatory breach (or anticipatory repudiation) is a CLEAR STATEMENT OR INDICATION that a party WILL NOT PERFORM future contractual duties when they become due. This is a major breach as to those duties, the non-breaching party is EXCUSED from performance of all remaining contractual duties, and the future duties of the breaching party are ACCELERATED to the present.

If a party has a REASONABLE BASIS to believe the other party may not perform future contractual duties, the party may demand REASONABLE ASSURANCES and REFUSE TO PERFORM until they are provided. Reasonable assurances generally means a financial guarantee or payment into escrow.
If reasonable assurances are properly demanded and not provided, the failure to respond constitutes an anticipatory breach.



Definition 32. WAIVER of the breach?
Under contract law if a non-breaching party lets the breaching party continue performance after a major breach it WAIVES THE BREACH. The waiver cannot be revoked, and the non-breaching party is forever ESTOPPED from citing the breach as major and can only cite it as a minor breach.


Definition 33. Was there a BREACH OF IMPLIED COVENANT?
An IMPLIED MATERIAL CONDITION of every contract is that the parties must act in good faith and are bound by an IMPLIED COVENANT that they will act as reasonably necessary to help the other parties enjoy the benefits of the contract and that they will not act in any way to prevent that from occurring.

Sample 6, page 92

5) BREACH OF IMPLIED COVENANT?
Under contract law an IMPLIED COVENANT by each party to a contract is that they will not act to prevent the other party from performing contract duties and they will take reasonable steps to assure the other party enjoys the expected benefit of the bargain. Performance of this implied covenant is an IMPLIED MATERIAL CONDITION of every contract,
Here Fester breached the implied covenant because he denied Dottie the opportunity to complete performance in acceptance. This caused a failure of an implied material condition because it totally denied her any of the benefits she expected from the contract.
Therefore, Dottie can claim a MAJOR BREACH by Fester.



Definition 34. BREACH? MAJOR OR MINOR?
Realize the first party to breach a contract is the breaching
party and after that the other party is the non-breaching party no matter what they do later.

For COMMON LAW say,
Under contract law a BREACH is a failure to perform a contractual duty when it becomes due. A MAJOR BREACH is either an act which deprives the other party of the BENEFIT OF THE BARGAIN or the violation of an EXPRESS OR IMPLIED MATERIAL CONDITION by a party, regardless of its effect on the other party. A major breach EXCUSES the non-breaching party from all further performance of contractual duties and ACCELERATES the future contractual duties of the breaching party to the present so the non-breaching party can seek IMMEDIATE PAYMENT OF DAMAGES.

For UCC say,
Under the PERFECT TENDER RULE of the UCC any shipment of non-conforming goods is a breach of contract. There is no distinction between “major” and “minor” breaches.

For UCC DIVISIBLE CONTRACT SITUATION say,
Under the UCC a breach with respect to any shipment of goods under a DIVISIBLE CONTRACT does not constitute a breach of the entire contract. A DIVISIBLE contract is one under which goods are to be delivered in separate shipments which can each be evaluated separately under the contract.


Sample 2, page 78
7) BREACH?
Under the UCC PERFECT TENDER RULE goods must be delivered exactly as ordered. A seller that gives notice of intent to CURE a shipment of non-conforming goods has a right to cure within the contract period and a right to extra time to cure if non-conforming goods were delivered with a reasonable belief they were suitable for the buyer's needs.
Here Bob delivered non-conforming goods because the tuxedo was not an "exact fit" as promised. Bob gave notice of intent to cure, and had time within the contract period to cure the lack of fit.

Therefore, Bob breached, but had a right to cure the breach.

Was the contract MODIFIED to a higher price?

Under the UCC a modification of a contract by agreement between the parties does not require additional consideration.
Here Al did not agree to pay a higher price because he only "nodded" agreement to the need for alterations. The alterations were so that Bob could cure his breach, and while Bob has a right to cure his breach, he has no right to charge Al for the alterations. Further, Al did not agree to modify the original contract terms.
Therefore, the contract was not modified to a higher price.

__________

Sample 5, page 89
6) BREACH?
Under contract law a BREACH is a failure to perform contractual duties when they become due. A MAJOR BREACH is one which denies the non-breaching party the EXPECTED BENEFIT OF THE BARGAIN. A major breach completely excuses the non-breaching party from any further obligation under the contract. A MINOR BREACH is one where the breaching party has SUBSTANTIALLY PERFORMED. When there is a minor breach the non-breaching party must perform contractual duties but is entitled to an OFFSET as compensation for damages.

Here there was substantial performance because the home was all done "except for the painting". The minor breach cost Homer an additional $10,000, so he was entitled to an OFFSET in that amount.
Therefore, Homer must pay Wanda the contract price less an offset of $10,000, a net payment of $90,000.


Sample 7, page 96

8) BREACH?
Under the PERFECT TENDER RULE of the UCC goods must be supplied exactly as ordered. Any non-conforming delivery is a major breach.
A seller that delivers non-conforming goods has a right to GIVE NOTICE of intent to cure, and may CURE the shipment of non-conforming goods at any time within the contract period. Further, the seller gets a reasonable amount of extra time beyond the contract period if the original shipment was sent with a reasonable belief it would satisfy the buyer's needs.
Here Sellco shipped non-conforming goods because it shipped "blue widgets". They were not sent with a reasonable belief they would satisfy the buyer’s needs because they were sent by " mistake". And there is no time left to cure in the contract period because the shipment was on the deadline of "6/8/99”, and
Therefore, Sellco breached by shipping non-conforming goods, and has no time left to cure.



Definition 35. EFFECT OF BREACH ON A DIVISIBLE CONTRACT?
Under the UCC a breach with respect to any shipment of goods under a DIVISIBLE CONTRACT does not constitute a breach of the entire contract. A DIVISIBLE contract is one under which goods are to be delivered in separate shipments which can each be evaluated separately under the contract.


Definition 36. WAIVER of condition?
Under contract law if a party performs a contractual duty that is subject to a condition precedent at a time the condition fails to hold, the party WAIVES THE CONDITION. But after a condition has been waived the waiving party has a legal right to retract the waiver. Nevertheless, a Court of EQUITY may estop the retraction based on considerations of equitable estoppel.


Definition 37. Was there an ACCORD AND SATISFACTION?
Under contract law an ACCORD AND SATISFACTION is binding on both parties if there is an agreement by the parties to settle a reasonable and good faith claim by one party that the other party has breached the original contract. 


Chapter THIRD PARTY BENEFICIARY
Definition 38. Is the plaintiff an INTENDED THIRD-PARTY BENEFICIARY?

Under contract law an INTENDED THIRD-PARTY BENEFICIARY is a party that can seek damages for breach of a contract between two other parties because the contract was INTENDED to benefit them.
An INCIDENTAL beneficiary, one that was not intended to benefit from a contract between others, has no ability to enforce the contract or seek damages.
Contracts can only be enforced by VESTED, INTENDED third-party beneficiaries that are DONEES, intended to benefit as a GIFT, or CREDITORS, intended to benefit by EXTINGUISHING A DEBT.
At common law vesting was a more demanding requirement than it is modernly. Under the modern view VESTING occurs if the beneficiary becomes aware of and relies on the existence of the contract.


Sample 3, page 80

GROUCHO v. HARPO
2) Groucho's rights under a THIRD-PARTY BENEFICIARY CONTRACT?
Under contract law a THIRD-PARTY BENEFICIARY CONTRACT is one with a main purpose of providing a benefit to a third party. The contract can be enforced by the original party, the promisee, or by a vested intended beneficiary.
A beneficiary may be a DONEE (of a gift) or a CREDITOR (payment of a debt) beneficiary. The beneficiary vests upon becoming aware of and changing position in reliance on the contract.
Here the purpose of the contract is to benefit Chico because he was to get a "new Dodge" as a "birthday present." Therefore this is a third-party benefit contract. Chico is an intended DONEE beneficiary because it is a "birthday present."
Groucho is the promisee because Harpo promised to "deliver" the car in "two weeks." Harpo is the promisor because he has promised to deliver the car to Chico.
Therefore, this is a third-party beneficiary contract, and Groucho as promisee can enforce it.
3) Groucho's REMEDIES?
Under the PERFECT TENDER RULE of the UCC a non-breaching buyer in a non-delivery situation can demand conforming goods, repudiate the contract or by goods to cover and demand the excess of the cover price over the contract price.
Here Harpo has breached because he did not deliver the promised car.
Therefore, Groucho can demand delivery from Harpo or repudiate the contract and demand return of his $2,000. If he covers by buying the car elsewhere he can demand the excess of his cover price, if any, over the contract price.

Sample 3, page 82
CHICO v. HARPO
7) Chico's rights as a THIRD-PARTY BENEFICIARY?
Third-party beneficiary contracts are defined above. Chico is an intended third-party beneficiary because the known purpose of the original contract was to give him a "birthday present." He vested when he became aware of the original contract and changed position in reliance.
A vested third-party beneficiary can enforce the contract against the promisor in the same manner as the promisee.
Therefore, Chico can enforce the original contract against Harpo in the same manner and extent as Groucho

8) Chico's REMEDIES?
Chico's remedies would be the same as Groucho.

CHICO v. SWIFTY
9) Chico's rights and remedies against Swifty?
Since Swifty agreed to perform the duties of Harpo, Swifty assumed the same liability as Harpo. And since Chico has the same enforcement rights as Groucho, Chico's rights and remedies to enforce the contract against Swifty are the same as against Harpo.
CHICO v. GROUCHO
10) Chico's rights and remedies against Groucho?
A donee beneficiary cannot enforce the promise of a gift against the promisee at law and can only enforce at equity based on promissory estoppel.
Here Groucho entered into the contract with Harpo to give Chico a GIFT, so Chico was a DONEE beneficiary. While there is no evidence Groucho has breached the contract with Harpo, and even if he did Chico would have no right to enforce the contract against Groucho at law.
Therefore, if Groucho had refused to perform the contract (e.g. had refused to make the car payments) Chico could only plead equity against Groucho based on principals of promissory estoppel.




Definition 39. STANDING based on a VALID ASSIGNMENT?
Under contract law an ASSIGNEE can seek damages for breach of a contract from the contract promisor if the assignee was EXPRESSLY ASSIGNED the rights of an original promisee, the ASSIGNOR, by EXPRESSION OF CLEAR INTENT.
An assignment BECOMES EFFECTIVE when the assignee gives the promisor NOTICE of the specific rights assigned. When the assignment becomes effective the promisor is liable only to the assignee and the rights of the original promisee/assignor are EXTINGUISHED.
If the assignment was in exchange for CONSIDERATION given by the assignee to the promisee/assignor, the assignment is IRREVOCABLE, and it creates a legal contract between the assignee and the promisee/assignor. That contract creates implied warranties 1) that the rights assigned exist, 2) that the promisee/assignor has the authority to assign them, and 3) all documents provided are bone fide. The assignee may seek legal damages from the assignor for a breach of warranty.
If the assignment was GRATUITOUS it is REVOCABLE until the assignment is made 1) in writing, 2) a token chose is delivered, or 3) detrimental reliance makes revocation inequitable. A gratuitous assignment creates no implied warranties and can only be enforced in equity.


Definition 40. VALID DELEGATION of performance
Under contract law the duty to perform under a contract may be DELEGATED to a DELEGATEE by an original promisor/delegator. However, the promisor/delegator remains primarily liable to the original promisee for performance of the contract. The delegation becomes EFFECTIVE when the delegatee agrees to perform the duties of the promisor/delegator.
If the delegatee accepts the delegation in exchange for CONSIDERATION, a legal contract is created between the promisor/delegator and the delegatee, and the original promisee is an intended third-party beneficiary of that contract. As an intended third-party beneficiary the promisee has standing to pursue legal actions against both the promisor/delegator and the delegatee.
If the delegatee GRATUITOUSLY accepts the delegation the delegatee has no legal liability to the original promisee and the promisee can only enforce the delegation agreement in equity by showing detrimental reliance.


Sample 3, Page 81

GROUCHO v. SWIFTY
4) Groucho's rights under the DELEGATION contract?
Under contract law a DELEGATION is a second contract conveying the duty of performance under the first contract from the original promisor to a delegatee. The promisor in the first contract retains primary liability to the promisee. The delegatee assumes secondary liability to the promisee of the first contract if she expressly accepts the delegation in exchange for consideration, a bargained for exchange of value creating legal liability. In the delegation contract between the promisor/delegator and the delegatee the original promisee is a CREDITOR third-party beneficiary with standing to enforce the contract.
A delegatee can raise all defenses that are available to the promisee in the original contract.
Here there is a delegation contract between Harpo and Swifty supported by consideration because Swifty expressly accepted the duty by saying he "agreed to deliver" in exchange for an “immediate payment of $20,000”.
Therefore, Groucho has standing to enforce Swifty's promise to deliver the car as a creditor third- party beneficiary.
5) Groucho's REMEDIES against Swifty?
A promisee under a contract can enforce the delegation contract as an intended third-party beneficiary in the same way as the original promisee of the delegation agreement (Harpo).
Here Groucho's remedies against Swifty are the same as his remedies against Harpo, and Groucho can recover from Swifty any amounts he cannot recover from Harpo.

HARPO v. SWIFTY
6) Harpo's rights under the DELEGATION contract? Delegation is defined above.
Here the delegation from Harpo to Swifty is a contract between them because Swifty promised "to deliver the car", and it is a legal contract supported by consideration because Swifty received an “immediate payment of $20,000”.Swifty was the promisor and Harpo the promisee.
Therefore, Harpo can enforce his contract with Swifty and seek recovery from Swifty for any damages due Groucho and/or Chico.


Definition 41. Effect of ASSIGNMENT on CLAIMS AND DEFENSES
Under contract law a promisor may generally assert any claim or defense against the assignee that could have been asserted against the promisee/assignor. 


Definition 42. Effect of MODIFICATION AFTER ASSIGNMENT?
MODIFICATION of a contract after it has been assigned is generally effective against the assignee if 1) the contract has not yet been fully performed, and 2) the modification is made in good faith and in accordance with reasonable commercial standards. The assignee acquires CORRESPONDING RIGHTS under the modified (or substituted) contract.


REMEDIES
Definition 43. COMMON LAW REMEDY of the NON-BREACHING PARTY?
Under common law the non-breaching party has a right to COMPENSATORY DAMAGES calculated as the sum of 1) RELIANCE DAMAGES, out-of-pocket expenses the non-breaching party paid before the breach in reliance on the contract, 2) EXPECTATION DAMAGES, the expected benefits of the contract lost because of the breach, 3) INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, out- of-pocket expenses the non-breaching party paid because of the breach (e.g. storage costs) and 4) CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, lost profits on collateral contracts that failed because of the breach.

Non-breaching parties must prove their damages with substantial CERTAINTY, that they were CAUSED by the breach, and COULD NOT HAVE BEEN AVOIDED. This is sometimes called the DUTY TO MITIGATE damages.

If the breaching party has SUBSTANTIALLY PERFORMED, the non-breaching party is still obligated under the contract with an OFFSET for damages against the contract price. But if the breaching party is in MAJOR BREACH the non-breaching party is freed from all obligations under the contract and has a right to an award of all damages caused.

A non-breaching buyer of unique property such as land or services can also ask for an order of SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE to obtain title, possession or performance.


Sample 6, page 92

6) Dottie's CONTRACT REMEDY?
Under contract law remedies are COMPENSATORY to give the non-breaching party the benefit of the bargain, the compensation that had been bargained for. If property is UNIQUE money damages are in inadequate remedy and SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE is appropriate.
Here the stock is not “unique” and money damages are adequate.
Therefore Dottie's remedy is an award of money damages equal to the value of the stock.




Definition 44. CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES?
Under HADLEY V. BAXENDALE, a party to a contract may recover CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES such as LOST PROFITS expected from collateral contracts that fail because the contract was breached only if it can be shown the damages were [CCCC] 1) CONTEMPLATED (foreseen) by both parties at the time of contract, 2) CERTAIN (measurable) as to dollar value, 3) CLEARLY CAUSED by (resulting from) the breach and 4) the loss COULDN'T BE AVOIDED.


Definition 45. COMMON LAW REMEDY of the BREACHING PARTY?
Under common law a breaching party that has SUBSTANTIALLY PERFORMED has a right to recover the CONTRACT PRICE LESS AN OFFSET for damages caused by the breach. The remedy of a party in MAJOR BREACH is to seek RESTITUTION for AMOUNTS PAID and BENEFITS CONFERRED to the extent they exceed the damages of the non-breaching party, to prevent UNJUST ENRICHMENT.


Definition 46. UCC REMEDY of the NON-BREACHING BUYER?
Under the PERFECT TENDER RULE of the UCC a non-breaching buyer can either ACCEPT or REJECT non-conforming goods. Also they can REPUDIATE the contract and COVER, or they can AFFIRM the contract and DEMAND CONFORMING GOODS. The measure of damages is the excess, if any, of market or cover price over the contract price. If the goods are unique non-breaching buyers can ask for an order of SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE to obtain title and possession. 

Sample 7, page 97
9) Buyco's REMEDY?
Under the UCC a buyer who receives nonconforming goods can REJECT the goods and REPUDIATE the contract. The buyer can COVER by buying the goods elsewhere and demand the excess of the cover price over the contract price, or demand the excess of market price over the contract price.
Here Buyco had a right to reject the goods, and it covered at a price of $5. Since this is less than the $6 contract price, Buyco has suffered no loss as a result of the breach and has no right to receive damages from Sellco.

Therefore, Buyco's demand for $50,000 has no basis and they would get nothing.

Definition 47. UCC REMEDY of the NON-BREACHING SELLER?

Under the UCC a non-breaching seller can sell rejected but conforming goods at a PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SALVAGE SALE (with NOTICE TO BREACHING BUYER) and demand the excess, if any, of the CONTRACT PRICE over the SALVAGE SALE price.
Alternatively, in a LOST-VOLUME SITUATION where sellers cannot effectively sell the same goods to someone else, they can demand the BENEFIT OF THE BARGAIN of their “lost profits” – the excess, if any, of the CONTRACT PRICE over their cost of acquiring the goods.
And if the goods have been special made or for some other reason can not be sold elsewhere the non-breaching seller can “sue on the contract price” to get a judgment for that amount.


Definition 48. UCC REMEDY of the BREACHING SELLER?
Under the UCC a breaching seller that GIVES NOTICE of an intent to cure has an absolute right to cure the breach WITHIN THE CONTRACT PERIOD, and also has a right to REASONABLE EXTRA TIME in which to cure beyond the contract period if non-conforming goods have been shipped with a reasonable belief they would satisfy the needs of the buyer.


Definition 49. Is the LIQUIDATED DAMAGES clause enforceable?
LIQUIDATED DAMAGES CLAUSES specify that the sole remedy of the non-breaching party is a specified amount of money damages. 

These clauses are only enforceable if 1) DAMAGES arising from a breach were UNCERTAIN at the TIME OF CONTRACT, 2) the specified amount was REASONABLE at the time of contract, and 3) enforcement after a breach will provide a REASONABLE REMEDY for the non-breaching party.

Definition 50. Was there an IMPLIED-IN-LAW CONTRACT?
The Court may either award the amount necessary to prevent an unjust enrichment to the respondent.


Definition 51. Can PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL be pled?
Under the theory of PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL an agreement that otherwise is unenforceable at law for lack of consideration may be enforced at equity to the extent necessary to avoid injustice. In order to plead equity a party must have CLEAN HANDS. Promissory Estoppel applies where the party to be bound made a 1) promise with 2) intent to induce reliance and there 3) was reasonable reliance and 4) failure to enforce the promise would cause an injustice.


Sample 4, page 86

5. If the contract of April 1 is legally unenforceable by Deccra, what equitable argument might it make?
7) PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL?.

Under the doctrine of PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL a party can seek enforcement of an otherwise unenforceable promise where 1) a party made a promise, 2) intending to induce reliance, 3) there was reasonable reliance by the other party and 4) injustice will result if the promise is not enforced..
Here Al made a promise to Deccra because he “agreed on April 1 to a new arrangement”, and he did that intending to induce reliance.
Al would argue that Decca did not reasonably rely because it was aware Al was a minor and could repudiate the contract at any time. Deccra would argue that Al would reap an UNJUST ENRICHMENT because it incurred "$360,000 in distribution expense."
Therefore, it would appear that Decca's restitution to Al should be reduced by this amount and restricted to the actual profit made by Decca.

Sample 5, page 89
4) Enforceable by PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL?
Under the theory of PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL an agreement that otherwise is unenforceable at law for a lack of consideration may be enforced at equity to the extent necessary to avoid injustice. In order to plead equity a party must have CLEAN HANDS. Promissory estoppel applies where the party to be bound made a 1) promise with 2) intent to induce reliance and there 3) was reasonable reliance and 4) failure to enforce the promise would cause an injustice.
Here Homer made a promise because he "promised" to pay $30,000. And he did that with intent to induce reliance because Homer didn’t want to “live in a tent”. Bill reasonably relied on Homer’s promise because he "hired Fred" in "reasonable reliance" on the promise. But there is NO INJUSTICE because Bill was only induced by Homer's lie to do exactly what he was already legally obligated to do -- finish the house. Homer reaped NO UNJUST ENRICHMENT because he only got the house that he had already been promised, and had promised to pay for.
Therefore, Bill was not induced to do anything he was not otherwise obligated to do, and Homer did not receive anything of value that he was not entitled to.
Since there was no injustice, promissory estoppel would not apply.
Further, Bill had UNCLEAN HANDS because he had a legal duty to perform under the contract, and he elicited Homer’s promise to pay $30,000 more by threatening to breach the contract. A Court of equity will not act to enforce a promise elicited by a threat of illegal conduct.
Therefore, Homer’s promise to pay more cannot be enforced at either law or equity.

Sample 6, page 93

3. What are Dottie's remedies for enforcement at equity?
8) PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL?
If a plaintiff has no adequate remedy at law, they may be able to obtain a remedy in equity. Here Dottie has an adequate remedy at law as to the promise of the stock, so she cannot seek enforcement at equity as to that part of Fester’s promise. But since she has no adequate remedy as to the promise of the house, she can seek a remedy at equity as to that part of her claim.
Under the equitable doctrine of PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL a promise or contract that cannot be enforced at law might be enforced at equity to the extent necessary to prevent unjust enrichment where 1) the party to be bound made a promise ,2) intending to induce reliance, 3) there was reasonable reliance on the promise by the party seeking equity, and 4) justice demands enforcement.
Here there was a promise because Fester "promised" to give Dottie the house. And Fester made the promise intending to induce reliance by Dottie because he wanted her to “move" to where he lived and "nurse" him. Dottie reasonably relied because she trusted him as an "honest, God- fearing Christian." And there would be injustice otherwise because she nursed him for "10 years."
To enforce the promise Dottie would argue that an award of money damages is insufficient to prevent unjust enrichment because the “house” is unique property. A Court of equity may order title to the house conveyed to her (EQUITABLE REPLEVIN) to prevent injustice.
Therefore, Dottie may be able to enforce the promise in equity even though it could not be enforced at law.




Definiton 52. Can DETRIMENTAL RELIANCE be pled?

Under the theory of DETRIMENTAL RELIANCE an agreement that otherwise is unenforceable at law for 

deliberately false representations of fact by the respondent OR deliberately misleading behavior of the respondent

may be enforced at equity to the extent necessary to avoid injustice. In order to plead equity a party must have CLEAN HANDS. Promissory Estoppel applies where the party to be bound made a 

1) promise with 
2) intent to induce reliance and there 
3) was reasonable reliance and 4) failure to enforce the promise would cause an injustice.


Definiton 53. Is EQUITABLE RESTITUTION appropriate?

EQUITABLE RESTITUTION is a remedy awarded by a Court of EQUITY when the parties have no adequate legal remedy. The purpose may be to compensate for injuries suffered, prevent unjust enrichment, prevent frustration of reasonable expectations, or restore the status quo.


Sample 6, page 93

4. What are Dottie's remedies in alternative to enforcement? 

9) EQUITABLE RESTITUTION?
At equity a party that cannot enforce a promise at law or equity may still seek damages in RESTITUTION to prevent UNJUST ENRICHMENT. The measure of damages may be either the benefits their performance conveyed to the breaching party, or else the detriment they have suffered in reasonable reliance.
Here Dottie can seek RESTITUTION for the benefits she conveyed to Fester. He enjoyed benefits that would have cost him $40,000 a year for ten years, so he enjoyed an unjust enrichment of $400,000.
In the alternative Dottie suffered a loss of $50,000 on her house and foregone wages of $2,500,000 over the ten year period, for a total of $2,550,000.

Dottie may seek an award of money damages in these amounts in equitable restitution.





Definiton 54. Is SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE appropriate?

SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE is an equitable remedy. It is an order of the Court directing parties to deliver possession and title to unique property. 

Definiton 55. CONSIDERATION?
Definiton 56. MUTUAL ASSENT?


Sample Answer 1: Contract Formation
[ANSWER EXPLANATION: This question is a typical FORMATION question because it goes through a series of communications between the parties. When you see messages going back and forth, it is a FORMATION question, so analyze each message.
Start with an INTRODUCTORY DEFINITION of a contract. Then chronologically analyze each communication to see if it is an OFFER. Once there is an offer, the next issue is whether the offer is ACCEPTED.
If there is offer and an acceptance a contract forms and the next issue is the TERMS of the contract.
After the contract and terms are discussed the next issue is whether there has been a BREACH. And if there is a breach, the issues are WHO BREACHED and the REMEDIES of the parties.]

Sample Answer 2: UCC and Acceptance Varying Terms

[ANSWER EXPLANATION: This is a UCC question, obviously. Bob breached by delivering non-conforming goods that failed to provide a perfect fit, as promised. But he has time to cure, and gave notice he intended to cure.
If Al wants out of the deal, he can claim a lack of a writing. He can do that because he is not a merchant, and the “sales confirmation” does not apply to him. He would be a merchant if he were a collector or hobbyist. But just buying lots of clothes doesn't make him a merchant any more than you are a merchant because you have bought a lot of groceries.
And Al also possibly can claim frustration of purpose.]

Sample Answer 3: Third Parties in a UCC Setting

[ANSWER EXPLANATION: The point of this question is that a contract intended to benefit a third party (Chico) can be enforced against the promisor (Harpo) by both the intended beneficiary (Chico) and the promisee (Groucho). Further, a delegation contract supported by consideration (a legally binding contract and not just a gift promise) can be enforced by the delegator (Harpo) against the delegatee (Swifty) and also by the promisee (Groucho) and intended beneficiary (Chico).
But if the promisee’s effort (Groucho’s effort) to bestow benefit on the beneficiary (Chico) is gratuitous, the donee beneficiary cannot enforce the original contract (Groucho-Harpo contract) against the promisee (Groucho) at law. The donee beneficiary could only plead promissory estoppel or detrimental reliance against the promisee in equity, given evidence to support such a claim.
If the contract is for a sale of goods, as is the case here, the UCC also governs the remedies of the parties at law, but the equitable remedies would generally remain the same as at common law.
You should identify each party as promisee, promisor, delegatee, donee/creditor beneficiary, etc. because that designation determines their RIGHTS and REMEDIES (just as the call of the question asks.)
Keeping the parties straight may require drawing a diagram and labeling each party with the various terms.]

Sample Answer 4: Defenses

[ANSWER EXPLANATION: The most important thing this question teaches is how to "follow the call" of a STRUCTURED CALL while still addressing important issues the call fails to mention.
While the CALL asks you about Tom’s rights against Al, and Al’s rights against Tom, and Al’s rights against Deccra, and Deccra’s rights against Al, you only have to state the parties twice: “Tom v. Al” and “Al v. Deccra”. It is simply a waste of time to state the parties again with their names switched around.
The call of the question asks the validity of an oral contract. That requires you to immediately determine if the UCC applies. UCC Article 2 does not apply because this question does not involve the sale of goods, but Article 1 (1-206) may apply because it involves a sale of recording rights. Even if those do not apply, the Statute of Frauds applies because this is a contract that necessarily cannot be performed in less than a year.
Remember oral contracts and contracts signed by minors may be valid but not enforceable. Or, they may be unenforceable at law but enforceable at equity. It depends on the facts. Even if a party cannot enforce the contract, they may get quantum meruit reimbursement if the other party would otherwise receive an unjust enrichment.
Deccra’s defense against enforcement of the March 1 contract could be stated as the issue of “unilateral mistake” where Tom knew Deccra was mistaken, but since Tom deliberately lied to Deccra about Al’s age with intent to deceive “fraud” seems the more accurate issue statement.]

Sample Answer 5: Common Law Modification, Breach and Remedy

[ANSWER EXPLANATION: Don't let sympathy blind you. Effective modification of a common law contract (not UCC) requires an exchange of consideration. Here Bill receives a promise of $30,000, but Homer gets nothing. If Homer gets nothing, then he gets no consideration (no bargained for thing in exchange for his promise).
Restatement 2nd provides that a “good faith” modification requires no consideration to be enforced at law. But that is not clearly “broadly adopted”. The general view seems to be that consideration is required to enforce a modification agreement at law, and without consideration it may only be enforced at equity to the extent necessary to avoid injustice. Besides, an agreement made “under threat” is hardly in good faith anyway.
Consider a situation where Bill demands $30,000 more but also promises to paint the house a different color. In that case there would be a bargained for exchange of consideration, so Homer would have to argue he was forced to agree to pay more under duress, a different legal defense argument. But here that is not the case, so any argument of ‘duress’ is unnecessary and irrelevant.
For defenses, impossible means just that. If the non-breaching party can finish the job, so can the breaching party.
If the question has dollar amounts, state the dollar amounts each party should get (or pay) when discussing remedy.]

Sample Answer 6: Common Law Remedies

[ANSWER EXPLANATION: This call of this question is for a discussion of REMEDIES and yet the facts raise other issues that should be discussed first such as the Statute of Frauds.
Always follow the call of the question, but you can use "sub-issues" as shown here to discuss necessary issues that the call does not mention.
The first question asked in the call should settle the matter of the stock since Dottie has an adequate legal remedy as to that part of her claim. The last three questions deal with the promise of just the house, and as to that Dottie has no adequate legal remedy because the Statute of Frauds generally bars legal enforcement of an oral contract for conveyance of an interest in land.
Another possible issue here is the “part performance doctrine” under which the Court will legally enforce an oral sales agreement for land in certain very narrow circumstances. The reason I don’t discuss it in my sample answer is that it would so clearly fail that it did not seem an intended issue. That doctrine requires the “buyer” to take possession of the land in a manner that almost unequivocally proves an oral sales agreement. Here Dottie did not take possession; she shared possession. And nothing she did “unequivocally” showed any oral agreement to “sell” the land.
Therefore, it appears Dottie’s only remedies as to the promise of the house are at equity.]

Sample Answer 7: UCC Formation, Breach and Remedy
[ANSWER EXPLANATION: This is a simple UCC formation, breach and remedy question. The need for writing, and the existence of a writing must be discussed.
If an offeree says it “will” or “would” ship goods it is a promise to ship and an acceptance, even if they cite a varying term. In this case UCC 2-207 applies. But if the offeree only says it “can” or “could” ship on different terms it is not a promise to ship. It is really a rejection and counter-offer.
The unusual fact here is that Buyco has suffered no loss, so they can recover no damages. This should be expressly recognized. They promised to buy for $6 and they covered for $5. They benefited from Sellco's error and have no cause of action.]